US doctors say hydroxychloroquine is 'not promising' for treating coronavirus, but Donald Trump is taking it anyway
US President Donald Trump says he has started taking an anti-malaria drug that researchers say should not be used to combat coronavirus and has the potential to cause serious side effects. Studies from the US, France and China have concluded that hydroxychloroquine is not effective for treating COVID-19, and in April the US Food and Drug Administration warned its use could cause heart problems. Despite that, Mr Trump has called the drug a "game changer" in the fight against COVID-19, and now says he has been taking it for more than a week. In Australia, hydroxychloroquine has been spruiked by Clive Palmer, who took out back-to-back full-page newspaper advertisements to claim his foundation had bought 32,900,000 doses of it. Here's what we know about hydroxychloroquineWhat is hydroxychloroquine?An arrangement of hydroxychloroquine tablets. Several studies in different countries have yet to show benefits for coronavirus patients taking hydroxychloroquine.(AP: John Locher)It is usually in tablet form and regulates the activity of the immune system. It has mostly been prescribed to treat malaria, lupus and rheumatoid arthritis. Hydroxychloroquine has also been used for years to dampen the immune system in people with autoimmune conditions. In the US, conditional emergency use for adults hospitalised with a coronavirus infection has been approved by the USFDA, while in Australia a trial is underway using Australian Defence Force personnel. Research into its potential risks is ongoing. Why has it been linked to coronavirus?In clinical trials, hydroxychloroquine has been shown to stop coronavirus from entering cells. But that doesn't mean it would work outside lab conditions as a treatment. "One of the key things is that a lot of these drugs we find are going to be effective against the virus just in cells, [and] probably won't be that effective in the disease setting," Dr Larisa Labzin, an immunologist at the University of Queensland, said. "Really what we're looking for is not just that these drugs inhibit the virus replicating in people, but also that the people who get sick with the virus actually do better."Because hydroxychloroquine is already used in treatments for other conditions it can be fast-tracked in development to go straight to large human trials, unlike other drugs that would need to go through more tests first. In March, there was a surged in demand for hydroxychloroquine, driven by claims about its potential as a coronavirus treatment. That led to pharmacists being told to stop dispensing it so there would be enough supply for those who needed it as part of treatment for rheumatoid arthritis and malaria. Does it work for coronavirus?Several prominent doctors say they are worried that people could decide to take hydroxychloroquine because of Mr Trump's actions. "There is no evidence that hydroxychloroquine is effective for the treatment or the prevention of COVID-19," said Dr Patrice Harris, president of the American Medical Association. "The results to date are not promising."International research efforts have not yet found any benefits of taking the drug for those with coronavirus. A study from France concluded the drug did not significantly reduce admission to intensive care or deaths among patients with severe cases. A randomised clinical trial from China showed no improvement for patients with mild or moderate symptoms who were prescribed hydroxychloroquine. The drug made no difference in rates of clearing the virus and did not reduce the duration of symptoms, but did cause side effects. Two earlier large observational studies, each involving around 1,400 patients in New York, found no benefit from hydroxychloroquine. Going even further, two studies published last week in the leading medical journal BMJ concluded that hydroxychloroquine should not be used in the treatment of coronavirus. What are the possible side effects?The USFDA has released emergency-use guidelines for hydroxychloroquine outlining warnings for its potential side effects. They are:Dangerously rapid heart rateAbnormal heart rhythmsProblems with the heart muscle properly recharging between beatsIssues with the heart's ability to pump blood around the bodySevere hypoglycemiaRupturing of red blood cellsLow counts for platelets and red and white blood cellsLiver failureKidney failureIncreased risk of seizuresPsychosisDeliriumSuicidal behaviourHallucinationsRetina damageWhat is the Australian connection?The Australian Defence Force is testing Chloroquine, from which hydroxychloroquine is derived, on its personnel as a potential preventative measure against COVID-19. The resumption of trials of the drug has horrified an East Timor veteran who has been suffering long-term health issues after taking part in a controversial clinical trial of the drug almost 20 years ago. So far, 42 personnel have enrolled and started the 14-week trial, and Defence is seeking up to 700 civilian and ADF frontline healthcare workers to volunteer. Associate Professor Jane Quinn, a pharmacology researcher at Charles Sturt University's School of Veterinary Sciences, said she did not think there was currently enough international evidence of efficacy to justify the ADF trial. "Chloroquine is a drug that's been used for a very long time in the prevention and treatment for malaria and over time it's become increasingly out of favour particularly for having quite a significant side-effect profile," she said. "That's what makes it a little bit surprising that Chloroquine, particularly, is being suggested for use in this ADF trial."Which other drugs are being looked at?The experimental antiviral drug remdesivir, which belongs to a group used to treat HIV and hepatitis C, has shown some promise in the lab for treating SARS, MERS and coronavirus. Mr Trump has said he wants the USFDA to approve the drug "as quickly as they can". But early studies of its use have been criticised for lacking proper control measures, and two trials in China were suspended. Scientists are now waiting for the results of large randomised controlled trials in the US and Europe. The US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) has been giving the drug to some patients hospitalised with COVID-19 and lung complications. Preliminary results released in late April showed patients recovered 31 per cent faster with remdesivir than with a placebo. However, with conflicting data coming from a range of experiments, experts have urged caution. Remdesivir, which failed as a treatment for Ebola, is designed to disable the mechanism by which certain viruses, including coronavirus, make copies of themselves and potentially overwhelm their hosts' immune system.
