World Health Assembly formally adopts independent review into handling of coronavirus pandemic
The World Health Assembly has formally adopted a resolution calling for an independent review into the handling of the coronavirus pandemic. Key points:Australia was vocal in calling for the independent review, straining relations with BeijingDespite initial doubt, China added its name to the resolution before it passedThe review will investigate the global response to the pandemicDelegates applauded when the draft resolution passed without objection at a meeting in Geneva. Australia was among the nations to call for an independent probe, which put a strain on relations with Beijing. Foreign Minister Marise Payne said Australia welcomed the news. "The resolution commits to an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation into COVID-19, at the earliest appropriate moment, to review the lessons learned from the international health response coordinated by the World Health Organization (WHO)," she said. "Australia will continue to be a consistent and constructive voice in the international community to advance and protect our national interest and the global interest."Health Minister Greg Hunt, who addressed the assembly on Monday, said he was "delighted" with the passing of the motion. Delighted that the WHA Assembly has passed by consensus the Motion calling for an impartial, independent & comprehensive examination of the global response to COVID-19. China ultimately agreed to co-sponsor the resolution, adding its name to the document shortly before it was adopted. Chinese President Xi Jinping had earlier declared his country would support a review led by the World Health Organization, but only once the virus was brought under control. That led to some Australian Government MPs and senators claiming vindication for Australia's position. But Beijing's embassy in Canberra issued a statement saying the inquiry being considered by the WHA was "totally different" to the one Australia proposed, saying that to claim vindication was "nothing but a joke". "A close look at the draft itself can easily come to such a conclusion," the embassy said in a statement. During a media conference on Tuesday evening, China's foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said Australia's advocacy for the probe was improper. "China has stated its stand multiple times about Australia's independent probe on the epidemic," he said. "We firmly oppose political manoeuvring on the epidemic. "In fact, this kind of action isn't proper, won't win people's hearts and won't succeed."
