Queensland students return to school today as coronavirus restrictions ease
As more than 600,000 students from years 2 to 10 return to school, Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk says parents can be reassured that no new coronavirus cases have been recorded in Queensland overnight. "I want to thank all the school communities for getting the schools prepared, all the efforts that have gone in, the cleaning and the COVID safe plans and the rapid response plans are in place if there was to be an outbreak," Ms Palaszczuk said this morning. "All of our students are back at school today, and I know there are lots of students happy to back in the classroom, but also lots of happy parents out there." Latest information from Queensland Health. Maddeline Bailey returned to year 1 two weeks ago, leaving her big sister Charlotte to continue being home schooled by their busy parents at their Morningside home in Brisbane's east. The six-year-old was one of 185,000 littlies and senior students who were allowed to return to classrooms in a post-lockdown easing of restrictions. Today it is Charlotte's turn to return to school. Dad Julian Bailey said it had been a "stressful nine weeks", particularly at the start of the lockdown period, with the last two weeks dragging on a little.  "It has been surreal and hats off to teaching staff at all the schools.  "They have had to split themselves in many more ways than we would in a normal workplace," he said.  Mum Sylvia Vos who had been working as an engineer from home said Charlotte was over the moon about putting an end to digital play dates and being able to see her friends face-to-face. "It has been challenging it has been really interesting to work together as a family unit and we often sit down with the girls and say you know we need to work at this together and there was times we would get cranky and impatient," she said.  Both parents are celebrating their freedom and the daytime peace and quiet in the house from today. "I won't have Skype videos with a child just appearing in the corner at the back somewhere because that has been happening quite a lot, and you say, 'oh hello,'" Ms Vos said.  They plan a coffee catch-up out of the house to mark the post COVID-19 lockdown, and maybe a glass of wine tonight.  "We have been self-medicating a little with wine at night, but now life will get back to normal," she laughed.  At Pullenvale State School in Brisbane's west, year 4 student Amelie Goodsir said she was relieved to get back to school after learning at home. "All my brothers and sisters were annoying me," she said. She was most looking forward to seeing her friends and teachers. Zhenya Kireev dropped off both his kids — Stan in year 2 and Elena in prep —this morning. "It's good to have them back at school to study properly," he said. "It [home learning] was on and off, it was OK but I think it's better for them to go back." Fellow Pullenvale parent Claire Brodie said she had mixed emotions about dropping off her two children to prep and year 3 classes. "I've been quiet happy to have them home and being homeschooled, but then it's quite nice that they're going into school and seeing all their friends," she said. "And they've been missing their teachers so they're happy to go." For the Malloy family from Runaway Bay it is a huge weight off their shoulders. They've been in lockdown for over eight weeks, teaching two children at home, while also working from home. Mum Kelly worked for a mental health charity while dad Craig ran his marketing business. From piano lessons to maths, they said it was stressful and a challenge to keep juggling all their commitments. But this morning as they send 11-year-old Zara and nine-year-old Lincoln back to formal lessons they have mixed emotions. "It is quite a strange situation, school itself will be a bit different, it is a drop off and go system so no parent contact," Ms Malloy said. "And it's been hard trying to remember what to do, like we couldn't find their school shoes this morning because they have not worn them for so long. "But it will be nice to get back into a routine as the kids have been missing the structure and their friends.  "So hopefully smooth sailing from here."  Parents are concerned their children will struggle with social distancing rules, but Education Minister Grace Grace said they have no need to worry.  "Students don't require to necessarily be physical distancing or social distancing because of the practically of that," she said. "But obviously, we need to maintain our social distance for adults, for teachers, for parents not to gather around outside the school in carparks, for staff to stagger breaks." Ms Grace said schools were stocked up on cleaning supplies and had been thoroughly cleaned in the lead up to students returning.  School activities like sport would be off limit and there would also be staggered lunch breaks.  Queensland Secondary Schools Principals Association President Mark Breckenridge said his 600 members would be feeling a mix of excitement relief but also a degree of trepidation as they welcome students back.  A recent study found Queensland principals were the most stressed, depressed and burnt out in the nation.  The world pandemic adding to the pressure on them to create a "safe new normal" as kids were welcomed back.  "A lot of schools have pivoted a number of times to adjust to different ways of teaching and learning and this is the next step and hopefully the final step," Mr Breckenridge said.  "I think you have just pinch yourself and think has this really been real. "It has been an incredibly strange and trying year for everyone. "It seems like we finished Christmas and the summer break with the bushfires all around and the emotional toll that had on people and all of a sudden this virus arrives." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Dean of Education at Griffith University Professor Donna Pendergast said it was not surprising some students were anxious going back as "schooling is now so different from when everyone left". "We need to check children feel well supported at school and that their friendship groups have been re-established," she said. She was also urging children to not to think about their grades just yet, because their social and emotional well-being was more important at this stage. Term two will run until late June.  
