Queensland Government offers vouchers to get kids back into community sport after coronavirus
Parents whose incomes have been slashed because of the coronavirus pandemic are set to receive financial help from the Queensland Government to get their children back into community sport. Vouchers of $150 will be available for families who can prove the pandemic financial hit, as sporting clubs prepare to return to training and play from June 13 onwards. Sport Minister Mick Di Brenni said many families would struggle to re-enrol their kids into much-loved weekend activities. "This is about making sure that 73,000 households in Queensland that are doing it tough are going to be able to afford to play sport," he said. "Kids have been through a lot in 2020. This has been a really tough time for them. "And giving them the opportunity to get back out on the sporting field, with their friends, is extremely important." The Government will also repurpose more than $50 million of sports funding to get clubs ready to operate under new COVID-19 restrictions. From June 13, sports teams with up to 20 people will be allowed to resume, in line with strict coronavirus restrictions, including non-contact provisions. Full contact sport, and all other activities with larger groups, can resume a month later. All clubs will need to develop COVID-safe plans, which will include the sterilisation of equipment, the use of sanitisation stations, the reduction of spectators, and social distancing on the sidelines through the use of physical barriers in high-population areas. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said the $50m would be given as grants to help clubs get ready for the "new normal". "That includes $2,000 funding grants for up to 7,000 clubs state-wide to buy their cleaning equipment and other essentials," she said. "So, as we carefully start to resume training, sanitising balls, racquets and facilities before and after use is an absolute must to keep everyone and our communities safe." "It gives them time to get their COVID-safe plans in place and so that parents are aware and children as well." Federal guidelines have recommended limits on the number of parents, guardians and onlookers at games, which Ms Palaszczuk has backed. "It is going to be tough but we have to do it," she said. "What we don't want to see is large groups of parents congregating, as does happen on the side of sporting fields. "We really just have to listen to the health advice." 
