Coronavirus Australia news: Cyber crime on the rise during coronavirus pandemic, United Nations warns, as it happened
The United Nations says the coronavirus crisis is moving the world towards increased technological innovation and online collaboration, increasing our vulnerability to cyberattacks — and it is estimated one such attack happens every 39 seconds. Look back on Saturday as it unfolded. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery Gladys Berejiklian may have told people to start booking their holidays a few days back, but we're still a way off from travel restrictions being lifted on June 1. For the time being, recreational intra-state travel is off limits. Deputy Premier John Barilaro said while regional NSW will welcome visitors with open arms when the time for travel does come, holidaymakers should call their planned accommodation venues and attractions to ensure they will be open and confirm their bookings before travelling.  By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery There's a headline I never thought I'd write. But here we are.  Rent prices in Sydney have dipped to unprecedented levels and vacancies have soared amid the coronavirus pandemic. Inner Sydney currently has a 13.8 per cent rental vacancy rate, compared with 6.5 per cent last year, the latest data from SQM Research shows. Weekly rental prices in the CBD have also fallen by more than $100-a-week, compared with the same time last year. Here's the full story. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery Hi Brett, The Federal Government made a decision to ban Australians from travelling overseas on March 26 and there are no plans to lift that rule until at least the end of the year. There are exemptions to it, however, and the information on that can be found here. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery University of the Sunshine Coast nursing program leader Matt Mason says the biggest difference between those countries and Australia is the level of risk. "The main difference is that we simply don't have the same burden of disease that America or the UK or some of the other countries have," he says. "The risk of catching the disease is much, much lower here because we simply don't have it circulating to the same extent that America has." By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery 
