Bungle in coronavirus stimulus JobKeeper could be good in more than one way for the budget's bottom line
The JobKeeper bungle now means the Federal Government is essentially $60 billion richer, which is good news for the budget's bottom line. Economists say the savings should be used to taper off the payment for businesses who need it An error between the number of employees businesses estimated would be covered by the scheme and the actual amount currently receiving the payment forced the Australian Tax Office and Treasury to revise the total number, and cost, of the scheme down. The departments now say the scheme will cover 3.5 million workers, down from 6.5 million, and cost around $70 billion, down from $130 billion. Danielle Wood from the Grattan Institute said that, unsurprisingly, the difference in the amount will go towards softening the blow on the federal budget when it is handed down in October. "The Government has announced what we thought were around $195 billion in financial measures, $130 billion of which was the JobKeeper package," she said. "So, the $60 billion saving will mean the deficit is probably a bit smaller than we expected it to be." Ms Wood said if the revised number of employees accessing the scheme was an indication the economy was doing better than forecast, that could have other beneficial flow-on effects for the budget. "First of all tax receipts, obviously if we're not in such a big hole as we thought we were, that may mean that income taxes and company taxes are higher than a lot of us were expecting," she said. "It can also potentially mean lower spending on payments although, as we know, the unemployment rate has jumped up and we still have a lot of people on JobSeeker." But she also said it was important to note the difference between the estimated and actual figures could also be because businesses who had registered their interest in JobKeeper had not followed through. Economist and former Treasury official Warren Hogan said the error was significant and the savings were not entirely, as the Treasurer had claimed, "good news". "There isn't a sporting analogy for how big a miss this was," he said. "I'd be a little bit sceptical about painting a positive picture of this, I don't think that's right. "You've got a little bit more money than you thought you had, I don't think that means the economy is much better than you previously thought, although the Treasurer seems to think it is an indicator of that." Professor Hogan, who now works as an Industry Professor at the University of Technology's Business School, said it was "bad news" that the Treasurer had signalled none of the money would be redirected to other spending which would benefit the economy. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Both he and Ms Wood argued some of the unexpected windfall would be best spent on tapering out the JobKeeper program for businesses that were not back on their feet by September, when the scheme is currently due to finish. "They've got the flexibility to change the way the JobKeeper program finishes and that hard stop was always problematic," Professor Hogan said. He said there was going to be a lot of work for Treasury ahead in the fallout of the error, as they dealt with "a lot of moving parts" to adjust the budget and economic forecasts created on the original figures. On who was to blame, Professor Hogan said the error was one for Treasury, the ATO and the Government to learn from but it was "not a matter of blame". "This is all very new and when you rush things, especially at such a big scale, mistakes can be made," he said. "I don't know the mechanics and whether it was a silly error and someone should be held accountable within the ATO or Treasury. "We're in the biggest crisis anyone alive has seen from a society-wide point of view and we can't lay blame." 
