Coronavirus inquiry tensions leave WA farmers fearing more China tariffs after barley hit
Watching China slap an 80 per cent tariff on Australian barley this week has made West Australian farmers nervous about whether there is more trade pain to come, according to WA Farmers Federation chief executive Trevor Whittington. "Grains, wool, wine, horticulture, the seafood industry — there's a lot of talk around peak bodies and with producers over what's happened with barley and what potentially is on the horizon," he said. Mr Whittington is also the president of Wines Western Australia, an industry caught up in another Chinese trade stoush 18 months ago. "We've seen this behaviour by China before," he said. "This is probably the new norm in how China will react when it's under pressure for whatever reason, and it'll simply ignore existing trade agreements and good protocols and lean on its importers and speed up or slow down trade activity." Mr Whittington said China's barley tariff was not in the spirit of the China Australia Free Trade Agreement, which came into force in December 2015. "I think China is certainly doing itself a disservice by signing these sorts of agreements and not just with Australia, with many other countries and regions around the world and then blatantly ignoring them," he said. "So how this possibly helps China in the long term, it's only a question that they can answer. "But the [agriculture] industry will get on with it and identify other markets and spread its risk." University of Western Australia China expert Jie Chen said Australia's actions would influence whether there were more tariffs to come. "All cards are on the table," he said. "It depends on how Australia conducts itself in the next step in relation to the so-called independent inquiry into coronavirus to be led by the World Health Organisation, and how China will see Australia behave in this international investigation. "Particularly how Australia will collaborate with the United States in pursuing China in relation to the investigation. "I would say both sides have some room to manoeuvre." Dr Chen believed China's decision to impose the barley tariff amid Australia's calls for an independent inquiry into COVID-19 fit a familiar pattern of behaviour. "That China can penalise, can punish you and it can also reward you," he said. In particular, he cited China's 2010 decision to impose import controls on Norwegian salmon in apparent retribution for the Nobel Peace Prize being awarded in Oslo to the Chinese dissident, Liu Xiaobo. Eventually, diplomatic relations between the two countries thawed. Federal Agriculture Minister David Littleproud has already made it clear there would be no retaliation and Australia and China were not engaged in a "trade war". Independent WA-based China researcher Wai Ling Yeung believed China's tariff imposition had a lot to do with how it wanted its own people to see it. "The diplomats from China have been behaving in quite a strange way, I have to say, and there's a name that's been given to that called the 'wolf warrior diplomats'," she said. "Beijing is very eager to control the dialogue and rhetoric that's been going on worldwide concerning the COVID-19 [pandemic]. "From Beijing's point of view, that will have an impact on the governance of the Chinese government and also the sustainability of the Communist Party's governance as well." But Ms Yeung also believed the Federal Government's rejection of China's overtures to join its global infrastructure initiative, the Belt and Road project, was a factor. "Some of the Chinese diplomats in Australia were getting a bit nervous and stressed by the fact that even after trying very, very hard they only managed to get Victoria to promise to sign up," she said. 
