Ten-person dining rule for Sydney restaurants gets mixed response amid NSW coronavirus restrictions
No-show diners have been warned there is a "special place in hell" for them as Sydney restaurants get to grips with the state's 10-person dining rule. Eased NSW coronavirus restrictions, which came into effect last Friday, saw some restaurants and cafes open their doors again with only 10 customers allowed at a time. The new rules meant some eateries got some much-needed financial relief, but many have struggled to make opening worth their while. Surry Hills cocktail bar and restaurant Low 302 reopened this week but required bookings to secure a place.  A post addressing a no-show booking under the name Aimee went up on the bar's Facebook page on Saturday, telling her there was a "special place for you to burn in hospo hell". The post, which referenced the booking for four people, slammed the woman for wasting "40 per cent of the entire capacity". "You didn't have the common courtesy to call us up and cancel," the post read. "Maybe you have no idea the financial impact this has on a restaurant right now. Maybe you don't care. "You have single-handedly set the worst of precedence for our entire industry at this most difficult time." Low 302 now takes payment in advance to secure bookings at the restaurant, something management "really wanted to avoid having to do". Restaurateur Ben Siderowitz said taking payment in advance allowed him to create an "experience" for diners while also giving staff security. Mr Siderowitz runs Corner House in Sydney's eastern suburbs and said he took 4,000 bookings after announcing a special dining package. Up to 10 people can book out the venue for four hours for a group fee of $1,000, which includes a private bartender and chef to provide unlimited pizza. "We take the deposit upfront, so if someone doesn't show up it doesn't matter," he said. "We put the onus on the customer, and with lack of supply, demand increases — people just want to snap up the spot." Mr Siderowitz said he stayed up for three nights replying to hundreds of messages that poured in after he announced the deal.  The interest was so great that Mr Siderowitz has secured a second venue, 900 metres down the road from Corner House in Bondi, which opened on Friday. Thanks to low overheads, lean staff numbers and a backlog of stock, Mr Siderowitz said it had been a big week, with most groups spending much more than the $1,000 package. "Revenue may be down 80 per cent but profit is up 100 per cent," he said. Fabio Dore runs One Ford Street in Balmain and said the week had been fruitful for the popular restaurant. Mr Dore does not take pre-paid bookings but rather relies on the "loyalty of the locals" each night, as he has done for five years.  "I heard about the no-show in the city and I was very disappointed," he said. "It's common-sense thinking: if you book a restaurant, why wouldn't you turn up?" Mr Dore said he was comforted by the "safety net" of the JobKeeper payment for staff, which meant a no-show booking wouldn't damage the night's takings so severely. "But people should support the restaurant so it can survive, so your favourite restaurant is able to make it through this difficult time," he said. He said the 10-person limit had provided an opportunity to adapt the One Ford Street menu while maintaining a premium experience for diners. "Read the situation — if you're smart enough, what you're cooking can be a very good margin," he said. 
