Rockhampton aged care emergency sparks second investigation after nurse tests positive to coronavirus
Queensland Health says there will be an independent investigation into how a nurse with coronavirus continued to work at a Rockhampton aged care home, while showing symptoms. Key points:More than 600 people were tested for COVID-19 at fever clinics in Rockhampton at the weekendA separate 200 staff and residents of an aged care home have tested negative to the virus, after a nurse who worked there tested positive. More than 40 nurses are in isolation and 20 have been deployed from southern parts of the state to assistHealth Minister Steven Miles said he has asked the department's director-general to commission the investigation. "We want to understand exactly how it happened, what went wrong, why it went wrong and how we can make sure it never happens again," he said. "Not just at the 16 aged care facilities run at HHS but also at our Queensland Health sites. "We need to ensure all of our patients and residents in our care are kept safe."The Central Queensland Hospital and Health Service has also launched an investigation. More than 40 nurses are in self-isolation and hundreds of people are awaiting coronavirus test results after the nurse tested positive to COVID-19 last week and the aged care facility went into lockdown. The nurses — who worked in the same unit as the nurse who tested positive — have all tested negative but will be in isolation for two weeks in case they show symptoms and have to be retested. Mr Miles said 35 residents were moved from the aged care centre to other facilities across Rockhampton over the weekend to enable residents to have private rooms. "That has allowed residents to be moved around in the facility and have private rooms where they can be isolated with their own bathrooms, and infection control can be implemented," he said. Mr Miles said 763 Rockhampton locals were tested over the weekend and of the returned results, none have been positive. Not clear how nurse contracted virusChief Health Officer Dr Jeannette Young said all staff and residents from the facility will be closely monitored for a two-week period. "All of the 114 residents who were in the facility at the time the enrolled nurse was working in the facility have been tested and all of them are negative," she said. "Plus all of the staff who have worked at the facility for the last month have now been tested — except for one who's been on leave — all of those staff have been tested and are negative."Dr Young said she hoped the two investigations would get to the bottom of why the nurse continued to work while displaying symptoms and after being tested. "I've been very disappointed that happened," she said. "Since she [the nurse] had the confirmed result she has been extremely cooperative and has worked very closely with us, and indeed agreed to a second test. "Prior to then we need to work out what exactly happened."Dr Young said Queensland Health was still trying to work out how the nurse contracted coronavirus. "At this stage we still don't know whether she contracted the infection on one of the two flights that she was on to go down to Brisbane and back to Rockhampton, or whether it was in Brisbane itself — we don't know," she said. "She is a community-acquired case, we know it's unlikely she acquired it here in Rockhampton because it's so long since you had a confirmed case, but of course that still is possible."Nurses sent from southern QueenslandMedical staff from southern Queensland, including about 20 nurses, have been flown in to assist in hospitals, fever clinics and aged care facilities as the number of people stepping forward for testing increases. The crisis was sparked after an enrolled nurse, who is understood to have worked in reception at the state-run North Rockhampton Nursing Centre, tested positive to coronavirus last Thursday. The nurse is believed to have been contagious since May 3 and continued working while showing symptoms. She returned to her workplace after being sent for coronavirus testing, but before her results came back. Queensland Health is investigating the circumstances, including whether the nurse was checked for fever every day, as per requirements for all aged care facilities. A spokesperson for Queensland Health said all contacts were being closely monitored and secondary testing would be conducted if any of these individuals showed symptoms. Nurses in self-isolationCentral Queensland Hospital and Health Service said more than 600 people have been tested for the coronavirus at fever clinics in Rockhampton since Friday, and that more 5,000 calls had been made to the coronavirus hotline. Grant Burton from the Queensland Nurses and Midwifery Union said more than 40 nurses in the Rockhampton region had gone into isolation until they received their test results. "The fact that 41 or 42 staff have now been [self-isolated] at home has certainly been a challenge," he said. "Health services have risen to that and have staff flying in to assist."Mr Burton said union representatives were working with Queensland Health to ensure additional staff would be sent to Rockhampton if required in the coming days. "Staff are coming from Metro North and South with further discussions with Wide Bay and Darling Downs," he said. "They will be where they're needed — whether that's the fever clinic, the general hospital or the aged care centre."There are now two fever clinics in Rockhampton, with others at Yeppoon and Gladstone. Mr Burton said with increased demand for nursing and health services, it was important for those on the front line to remember their own health. "They certainly go above and beyond, and they feel the need to come to work, but the message is clear — if you are sick, stay home," he said. "There is additional staff coming in and we will be working in collaboration with the service to identify any areas that are running short."'Eerily like Newmarch House'Aged and Disability Advocacy Australia (ADA) is a Commonwealth-funded group which provides support to older people using aged care, and their families and carers. After hearing from families at Sydney's Newmarch House, CEO Geoff Rowe said he was "disturbed" to learn about the news in Rockhampton on Friday. "It is eerily like what has happened at Newmarch House," he said. "The infection was brought into an aged care facility in Sydney by a staff person who was unwell. "What we're seeing coming out of the North Rockhampton Nursing Centre is very encouraging, we're seeing a very proactive response. What we saw at Newmarch was a very slow response."Mr Rowe said it could be a stressful and traumatic time for central Queensland families. "It's not unusual, based on our experience with Newmarch in Sydney, for family members to be feeling left out of the loop and to learn what is happening on the news, which is very distressing," he said. "A lot of family members concerns were similar or the same, it was often around the lack of communication, the lack of any knowledge of what was happening with the family member. "I think what we're seeing at the moment at the [North Rockhampton Nursing] Centre is quite a calculated and a careful response and unfortunately families need to be patient."He said the advocacy group was open to providing weekly video link updates, similar to what has been done for Newmarch House families, to improve communication if families reach out. Residents and families can contact ADA on their 1800 700 600 hotline between 6:00am and 10:00pm everyday for support.
