Coronavirus and social distancing have changed my relationships — how can I make it permanent?
A few weeks ago, at the end of a video call with a friend who works at Tamworth Hospital, we were saying our goodbyes and I told him: "I love you". This expression of tenderness was not a first for our friendship, however, the manner in which it was received — earnestly reciprocated and not deflected with a joke or a melodramatic reply — was. This sincere desire for closeness has manifested itself again and again in conversations with the men in my life, leading me to me hope that perhaps one of the unintended positive consequences of the COVID-19 crisis is that it may help us redraw the socially acceptable limits of masculinity. To say that this new-found sensitivity has taken me by surprise would be an understatement. Australian masculinity is kind of like a VB ad: there are almost imperceptible changes over time, but the underlying theme remains the same. You need only look to the archetypes of our national identity — the swagman, the ANZAC, the battler, Ned Kelly, Crocodile Dundee — to see that we have historically defined ourselves through a lens of rugged, stoic masculinity in which men avoid overt displays of emotion lest it undermine their self-image of toughness and laid-back larrikinism. But what if the pandemic is an opportunity for Australians to rethink our rigid ideas of what it means to be a man — for the better?A more caring way of being a manThe crisis has forced us to collectively re-evaluate fundamental aspects not just of our own lives but society as a whole. The social isolation we're experiencing has made many of us grapple with our interconnectedness and, in particular, how to maintain social bonds while we're physically apart. The lingering spectre of death and disease is a constant reminder of the things we can no longer take for granted, including our loved ones. With these uplifting thoughts in mind, in late March I resolved to start telling the people I care about how much they mean to me, and one major change I've noticed is that the men in my life are suddenly more willing to open up about their feelings and be vulnerable in a way they previously wouldn't have. And, it turns out, I might not be the only one. "There has been a trend [among men] towards more openness and authentic models of friendship in recent years, where genuine trust and closeness are valued," says Associate Professor Steven Roberts, who studies men and masculinity at Monash University. "The lockdown offers the possibility for an expansion of these behaviours."Men whose idea of maintaining friendship previously extended as far as texting "Pub tonight?" every few months are suddenly teeing up virtual coffee dates weeks in advance to candidly discuss their mental health. Social isolation, says Roberts, "is forcing us all to confront our need for intimacy, it's making clear we are all vulnerable."That's not to say this disruption will result only in positive changes. According to Associate Professor Michael Flood, who researches men, masculinities and violence prevention at Queensland University of Technology, crises such as pandemics can completely upend traditional gender roles. For example, the HIV-AIDS crisis in Africa "took such a profound toll that it interrupted many men's ability to be the breadwinners," Flood says, "either because economies collapsed or because of other rapid economic changes". As conventionally "masculine" norms became harder to embody, he says, "some men responded to the loss of that traditional male power through backlash. That is, there were increases in domestic and sexual violence against women."While we don't yet know exactly how the COVID-19 pandemic will affect the rate and severity of violence in Australia, some frontline workers are already reporting an increase in requests for help from victims of domestic violence. And a UN Women report published last month found that violence against women has intensified around the world since the outbreak of COVID-19. However, the potential for an increase in men's violence as a result of factors like economic upheaval and unemployment is by no means guaranteed, which is why a re-evaluation of what it means to be a man in our society is so necessary. Flood says there has been much greater community awareness and discussion about the "value of care and care work" in recent weeks. This "greater valuing of human mutuality, interdependence and community as key means of surviving ... and supporting each other through this pandemic", he says, has the potential to change our conception of manhood. For example, while women are still shouldering the majority of caring responsibilities, the Workplace Gender Equality Agency has found men are taking on more care and domestic work as a result of flexible working arrangements necessitated by the COVID-19 crisis. This slight redistribution of domestic labour represents an opportunity to value a new, more caring way of being a man. According to Roberts though, some pockets of society seem to have reverted to "old social norms". "Some have called this the return of the 1950s housewife, with women undertaking the large bulk of domestic duties and caring responsibilities, including home schooling," he says. What might a new, modern masculinity look like?Even if lockdown does lead to positive changes to gender roles, is it possible to maintain them post-pandemic? And if so, what might a new, modern masculinity look like?"There are opportunities [for men] to develop deep and profound empathy in this current crisis ... but whether we can sustain it is unclear," says Roberts. "One thing we can do as individuals and as a society is more overtly celebrate deviations from traditional masculine norms."Whether that's opening up about our feelings, prioritising a healthier work-life balance, or initiating housework without expecting praise, there are numerous ways men can start redefining masculinity for themselves. "A big difference is having a personal experience of a different life, a different way of living," says Flood — which is exactly what COVID-19 has given many of us. My personal experience is that there is a genuine desire among men to forge a more caring conception of masculinity. In the past two months I've seen previously stoic men break down over their anxieties about what the future holds. I've listened to them intently describe their newly discovered closeness with their children and disclose that, when this is all over, they don't want to go back to the way things were. There is a profound relief to be found in no longer trying to embody an unattainable idea of manliness, in loving and allowing yourself to be loved, in admitting that everything's not alright at a time when it so obviously isn't. Letting people know how you feel, asking for help when you need it — being vulnerable — isn't weakness, it requires strength. Which is why I'm vowing to keep telling the men in my life that I love them, and I encourage others to do the same, not just for our own sake but for that of the people around us. Because we can get it Skypin', we can get it typin', we can get it callin' our mates, a new-found masculinity needs a big old crisis and the best old crisis is COVID. COVID-19. We can get it carin', we can get it sharin', we can get it makin' a vow, matter of fact I've got it now.
