This is where Australians can travel during coronavirus lockdown
Over the past several weeks, Australia has successfully flattened the curve, making it one of just a handful of countries ready to start easing restrictions designed to stop the spread of coronavirus. But with NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian and Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk in a war of words over when state borders should reopen, it is clear not every leader is ready for life to return to some semblance of normal. All over the country, there have been strict quarantines enforced with few, if any, exemptions. Here's a rundown of what to expect in each state and territory. Where can Australians travel right now?Not overseas, that's for sure. The Federal Government made a decision to ban Australians from travelling overseas on March 26 and there are no plans to lift that rule until at least the end of the year. As for entering the country, only Australian citizens, permanent residents and their immediate family members can travel to Australia — but you had better be prepared to stay in mandatory quarantine for 14 days after arriving. Travellers who have a compassionate or compelling reason to travel to Australia will need to have an exemption from the Australian Border Force Commissioner before travelling. On the domestic front, there are only limited flights operating at the moment — sometimes just one per day between capital cities — and they are expensive!NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian and Tourism Minister Stuart Ayres have called for all states and territories to reopen borders by July 1, but Australians will most likely have to wait until July for more frequent flight routes to start up between states — perhaps even later for Queensland. What are the rules for travelling to each state?They are many and varied and strictly enforced. Here they are below. QueenslandPremier Annastacia Palaszczuk has said she won't be considering opening up the state's borders until at least September. So that means nobody is allowed into the Sunshine State unless they have a border pass. Queenslanders can travel freely to NSW and Victoria and don't need to quarantine but should reconsider their reasons for doing so. They can also travel to the Northern Territory and South Australia but will need to show why that travel is essential. If they can't, they'll go into a 14-day quarantine. Moving house or starting a new job, or attending to other essential tasks such as getting to a medical appointment or caring for a family member, all fall into the essential category. Residents who live on the borders of Queensland, NSW, South Australia and the Northern Territory are able to cross into different states more easily for work, school or medical services if that was usually a part of their routine. New South WalesRethink travelling to Queensland or South Australia if you live in NSW. Unless there's a good reason, you'll be denied entry. But travel to Victoria and the ACT isn't a problem. There is no need to quarantine or self-isolate back in NSW if you have travelled interstate. However, if you have symptoms, even mild symptoms like a cough, get tested. A person in Sydney can travel to visit someone in regional NSW and while they can stay overnight, they shouldn't be going anywhere for a holiday. Northern TerritoryQueensland, South Australia and Western Australia have just as strict border controls as the Northern Territory, so those in the Top End are best to just sit tight and enjoy their relative freedom compared to the rest of the country. Of course, if they really want to, they can go to NSW, the ACT and Victoria. Non-essential travellers to the state are required to go through a police control checkpoint to verify their medical status and purpose of travel. Those not eligible for an exemption must complete 14 days of forced quarantine. South AustraliaIt's perfectly fine for South Aussies to travel to NSW and Victoria with no need to quarantine. Those thinking of heading to Queensland, Tasmania or the Northern Territory without cause will be turned back. Everyone entering South Australia will be required to isolate for 14 days as well. Exemptions will apply for essential transport, workers providing essential goods and services, medical needs, freight and supply chain operations, residents of border communities, carers, and for police, emergency services and ambulance workers. TasmaniaTravel from the Apple Isle to Victoria and NSW is ok. Anywhere else, not so. Tasmanian residents will be able to complete quarantine at their home but non-residents will have to complete quarantine at government-provided accommodation. Essential travellers may be exempted from quarantine. VictoriaThe only other jurisdictions to share Victoria's relaxed border restrictions are NSW and the ACT, so Garden State residents can travel to both those places easily. Tasmania, South Australia, Queensland, Western Australia and Northern Territory won't let you in without a good excuse. Travelling to a holiday house within Victoria is still permitted if you own it, or often stay there. There are no requirements in Victoria to quarantine after travelling domestically. Australian Capital TerritoryThere are no border restrictions here and residents can flit between their state and NSW and Victoria with ease. Every other state will require a two-week period of quarantine when you enter. Canberrans should only travel outside of the Canberra region to visit family and friends for the purpose of providing care and support and they will need to abide by rules in the jurisdiction they are travelling to. Western AustraliaIf you live in the West, you can't get into neighbouring states Northern Territory and South Australia easily. But NSW, Victoria and ACT are fine — if you can find a flight to get you there. There is also a temporary closure of the Western Australian border in place which is being strictly policed. Travellers cannot enter Western Australia unless an exemption has been granted. I need to see my family – are there any exemptions?Yes, most states will allow entry or travel on compassionate grounds. Just make sure if you need to apply for an exemption ahead of time — such as in Queensland, Western Australia, Tasmania or South Australia — you do so before attempting to enter. Exemptions will be permitted for people who must cross a border for critical goods and services; a person who wishes to attend the funeral of an immediate family member, or; a person who wishes to visit a terminally ill or dying immediate family member. Participating in child custody arrangements, Family Court or parole and bail conditions are also valid reasons to travel. People who live near the borders of Queensland, NSW, South Australia or the Northern Territory can continue to travel for work or education into different states. These residents can also travel interstate to obtain essential goods and services, including to attend school or childcare, or obtain medical supplies or services or other essential services. But don't stay in your non-home state for longer than necessary.
