Coronavirus lockdown helps keep space in ICU for chronically ill people like me
I know many of you are finding lockdown challenging: negotiating appropriate backgrounds for Zoom meetings, supervising kids' lessons, baking up a storm. Like you, we are missing time with family and friends. But we have something extra to contend with. In January 2013, when I was 43 and our daughter Kimi was six, I received the shocking diagnosis of motor neurone disease (MND). I was a seemingly healthy academic, a swimmer and runner, an active parent and partner, a hugging friend. Now, my body is completely paralysed, except for my face. A ventilator pushes air in and out of a tube in my neck to keep me alive. I cannot speak. I communicate with a NeuroNode strapped to my wrist, cleverly transmitting my tiny muscle twitches as signals to my phone. On the plus side this means I am not at risk of touching my face with corona-coated fingers. But it also means that my family and I are more vulnerable than most to COVID-19, and not just because of my weakened body's inherent susceptibility. We are more vulnerable because I am dependent on a team of carers to do everything for me — from hoisting me out of bed to wiping my eyes (and arse), from feeding me lunch to suctioning my airway clear, from keeping my machines running to repositioning sore joints at 3:00am. It's impossible to be isolated with this team of nine carers who work shifts in our home, or to keep two metres away from the people who are washing my "charm"-pits or tipping condensation from the tube that pushes air in and out of my lungs. The absence of paid sick leave that is a shitty fact of life for casual workers becomes a dangerous disincentive to staying away and waiting to be tested if they develop symptoms. And it's best not to contemplate what would happen if infection of a team member or their contact necessitated all of us quarantining. I have learnt to appreciate the 'gift of life'Like others in the MND community I am particularly grateful for the work Australians have done in flattening the curve. I want ICU beds to be available not only for the people with COVID-19 who need them, but for others needing hospital care to give them a shot at staying alive. I have been one of those people several times in my seven years with MND, sometimes with a little notice, such as when I had a supra pubic catheter inserted just before I lost the capacity to stand up from the loo, even with (generous) help; more often catapulted in by a respiratory crisis. My most recent ICU "holiday" started with losing six hours to near-fatal carbon dioxide narcosis, continued with a life-saving tracheotomy and laryngectomy, and finished with a long, slow period of recruiting and training carers. That nine-and-a-half months in ICU, along with my years living with MND, have turned out to be good preparation for the current restrictions. I have learnt to appreciate the gift of life, to find pleasure in small things, to accept the derailment of plans, to adapt, to live in the present, to be grateful for (immense) kindness, to connect with others online, to cope with loss of control, to try to make the most of each day, to forgive myself when I stuff up, to welcome help, to laugh, to manage confinement (in my hospital bed, my immobile body), to trust, to view modest outings as a treat, to enjoy the life of the mind, to know how wonderful it is to be home with my beautiful, beloved family. Spare a thought for those just diagnosedThis month we celebrate MND week. Normally we gather, a community united in hope and remembrance. We participate in MND awareness campaigns and fundraising walks; we sell and wear cornflowers. This year, there are virtual gatherings and events, such as Cornflower Blue Day and Australia Moves 4 MND. I am lucky that this is my eighth MND week since my diagnosis. Typically people live two or three years, many for less. My heart goes out to those dealing with recent MND diagnosis — a mortality rate of 100 per cent, not one or two per cent — in this time of isolation. Please spare a thought for those trying to process this devastating news now, having only the screen version of health professionals like my fabulous neurologist, Professor Dominic Rowe. They are having to forgo closeness and hugs when they are most needed, and missing out on what might be their last opportunities to swim or work or go to the pub or attend family weddings or travel, making memories for their kids in the shadow of what will become our global collective memory. They're also unable to meet face-to-face with other people with MND or MND association advisers, contemplating death at a time when the number of mourners allowed at funerals is limited. Thank youAs a potential beneficiary, I say a heartfelt 'thank you' to everyone making sacrifices to flatten the curve. Thank you to our political leaders working together to make difficult decisions. Thank you to our dedicated healthcare workers for doing what you can to minimise mortality: I hope you can stay safe. Thank you to health communicators and broadcasters for keeping us informed. Thanks to essential workers for providing care, teaching, producing food, making masks, delivering pizza, researching, selling toilet paper, troubleshooting technology, first-responding, collecting garbage and more. Thank you to those who are finding themselves or their businesses reliant on or ineligible for welfare: I sincerely hope our taxes are raised and our safety net is widened and permanently strengthened. Thank you to comedians, musicians, dancers, writers and actors for spreading joy. And a huge thank you to everyone who's being kind to those around them, washing their hands and keeping their distance.
