NSW schools coronavirus shutdown is ending next week — here's what you need to know
NSW schools will see students back in the classrooms next week, but its not going to be business as usual for children and teachers amid remaining coronavirus restrictions. Key points:State students will return to full-time campus learning next MondayMs Berejiklian said it will become "common" to see schools close from infectionsHowever, kids are at low risk of being infected with coronavirus, experts saidNSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian previously said she wanted kids back in the classroom from Term 3, beginning July 21, but has since brought forward the date by about nine weeks. "The health advice is very clear: a return to full-time face-to-face teaching is safe," Ms Berejiklian said. Under the new guidelines, students will be able to use the school library, continue with apprenticeships, attend after-school care and mingle in the schoolyard. However, school excursions including camps, as well as work experience, debating and sport with other school communities will not be permitted. Are all Australian students going back to school?No — in NSW, all public school students have been ordered to return to the classroom next Monday, but Catholic and private schools are under no obligation to follow suit. NSW Catholic Schools said it aimed to have all 250,000 students back by the end of May, though no exact date has been provided yet. In Queensland, about 80 per cent of state school students returned to campuses full-time this week, and the remainder are set to join next Monday. In Victoria, all state school students will be in classrooms again by June 9, with students in preprimary, Year 1, Year 2, and Years 11 and 12 to return next Monday, too. Are children at risk?It's "extremely rare" to see COVID-19 cases among children both in Australia and overseas, consultant paediatrician Kirsten Perrett told the ABC. "Most of the time [with] respiratory viruses such as influenza, children are actually more susceptible to infection and severe disease, but this is not the case that we're seeing with COVID-19," Dr Perrett said. This may be because kids' immune systems are better at dealing with infections that they've never seen before, Dr Perrett explained. "If this was influenza," infectious disease physician and microbiologist Peter Collignon added, "we would keep schools closed until this was over". How will schools keep students safe?School students will not be required to socially distance from their peers, but have been told to maintain a 1.5-metre distance from their teachers and other school staff. Good hygiene practices will be encouraged, like washing hands regularly, avoiding sharing food or drinks and coughing or sneezing into the elbow. The Department of Education said it had provided schools with unlimited supplies of soap, sanitiser, disinfectant wipes and personal protective equipment (like masks). High-contact areas on campus, like door handles, lockers, light switches and handrails, will continue to receive additional cleaning, the department said. Students will receive priority over other passengers on public transport and will not be turned away from boarding a service, the department added. What if a student tests positive?If a case of coronavirus is found within the school community, lockdown protocol — including calling in health authorities, closing the school and contact tracing — will continue to take place. Since the pandemic began in March, numerous Sydney schools have shut temporarily after a confirmed case, including Epping Boys High School, Normanhurst West Public School, Warragamba Public School and St Mary's Senior High School. Ms Berejiklian said moving forward it would be "common ... for schools to be shut down temporarily". What if I choose not to send my child to school?Campuses have been open in NSW only for the children of essential workers for the past eight weeks, in a bid to slow the spread of coronavirus. However, from Monday, authorities have warned parents students will be marked absent if they are in good health but remain at home. "The message is schools return next week and students need to be back in the classroom," Minister for Education Sarah Mitchell said. "Rolls will be marked as per normal and unexplained absences will be followed up. "You should be at school — as long as you are well."
