SA's last remaining COVID-19 patient leaves Royal Adelaide Hospital
South Australia's last remaining COVID-19 patient has left the Royal Adelaide Hospital, in what nurses say is a miracle recovery. Paul Faraguna, 68, the first COVID-19 patient to be admitted to intensive care and the last to walk out, was farewelled by staff from the infectious diseases ward with a standing ovation on Thursday afternoon. Mr Faraguna was admitted to hospital just over two months ago, after contracting the coronavirus aboard the Ruby Princess cruise ship. He was admitted to intensive care six days later, suffering organ failure and placed in an induced coma. "The doctors were unable to say what my future would be if I survived, even suggesting that I may have brain damage and be permanently disabled," he said in a statement. The Royal Adelaide Hospital's Nurse Unit Manager, Karen Shutz, said Mr Faraguna's journey was a rollercoaster for him and his family.  "We honestly didn't think he'd make it through, but to see him come out the other side is just the most amazing gift you can have out of this pandemic," Ms Shutz said. "He is one amazing, resilient gentleman, who I don't think I've ever seen him be down at all in the whole time he's been here with us. "It was just such a huge boost that somebody had made it out the other side who was really sick, so yeah, there were a few tears as he was walking out this afternoon." Mr Farugna is now headed for further treatment and rehabilitation at Modbury Hospital. "The only challenge left is to walk normally again, which should, I feel, happen in the near future due to my physiotherapy program," he said. SA Health hasn't recorded any new cases of coronavirus for two-weeks. The total number of COVID-19 cases detected in South Australia remains 439, but there are no longer any known active cases of the disease in South Australia. But SA Health continues to urge people to maintain social distancing and good hand, cough and sneeze hygiene practices. Health authorities also want anyone in SA with even only mild flu-like symptoms — or who have lost the sense of taste or smell — to get tested for COVID-19. 
