UK beaches packed on year's hottest day after easing of coronavirus measures
Thousands of people descended on British beaches on the UK's hottest day of the year, after the easing of coronavirus restrictions across England. With the official start of summer still a month away, the temperature reached 28.2 degrees Celsius at Santon Downham in Suffolk on Wednesday, with 27.8C recorded at London's Heathrow Airport. Popular seaside destinations, including Brighton, Bournemouth and Southend-on-Sea reported large midweek crowds. Under new rules in England, people are allowed to travel to leisure spots and meet one person outside their household, but are required to follow social-distancing guidelines. Tougher quarantine measures remain in place elsewhere in the UK, with the leaders of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland all sticking to the "Stay at Home" messaging. Southend Independent councillor Martin Terry said most people were observing social distancing and the council was doing everything it could to keep people safe. But some beachgoers on social media complained that not everyone was adhering to the recommendation to stay 6 feet (1.8 metres) apart. There were also long queues for seaside restaurants, including takeaway outlets serving traditional British fish and chips. Lockdown measures were eased in England last week following almost two months of restrictions. The UK's death toll from COVID-19 rose by 363 on Wednesday to 35,704, the highest tally in Europe and second in the world behind only the US. As many of its citizens visited beauty spots, the British Government pledged to have a "test, track and trace" program for coronavirus in place by June 1. It also sought to bring as many MPs as possible back to parliament by June 2. The dual announcements formed part of a strategy to persuade the UK that it is safe to move on to the next stage of easing the COVID-19 lockdown, with the reopening of schools for some younger children at the start of June.  Prime Minister Boris Johnson, who returned to work after a serious battle with COVID-19 last month, has been criticised for his Government's failure to have a national tracing system in place over the past 10 weeks.  "We're making fast progress in testing and tracing and I have great confidence that by June 1 we will have a system that will enable us, that will help us very greatly to defeat this disease," Mr Johnson said. British police issued more than 14,000 fines to lockdown flouters in England and Wales between March 27 and May 11, including 906 handed out to Londoners and 862 to repeat offenders. The penalty has now risen from 60 pounds ($111) to 100 pounds ($185). The unseasonably warm weather has seen many people throw caution to the wind as they look to socialise again after spending much of spring indoors. The average top temperature for London in May is 18C. ABC/wires 
