Closure of Target Country is a blow to rural communities like mine
Word that Target Country was coming to my hometown was a huge deal — perhaps the biggest news since a popular fast food joint set up shop. In Warwick, in country Queensland, we'd heard all about Target. Many of us knew it well from our trips to the city. But now, we wouldn't have to beg our parents to drive hours for a taste of metropolitan fashion, we could simply duck down to the glossy new shop on Grafton Street. And boy, did we think it was flash. Labelled the 'Country' version of the big city store, it looked and felt like the real deal. There was department store lighting. Nice change rooms. Trendy, better quality clothes you might see in magazines. When Target Country opened in Warwick, two hours west of Brisbane, teenage girls like my sisters, friends and I could spend hours perusing the store's aisles. But experiences like those may soon come to an end. Some stores will close their doors for good within the year and Warwick’s shop looks likely to be turned into a Kmart. "It will be massive for Target Country to close," one of my cousins who lives in town tells me. Just this week, she ducked into Target Country for an emergency pair of tracksuit pants for her spirited five-year-old son. "It's so handy that Target Country isn't in the shopping centre. You can park out the front, run in and run out. "If the store in Warwick closed, I'd also really miss having somewhere to go for affordable, yet quality, cotton sheets, towels and good basic clothes for myself." It might sound a little token, but in our town at least, Target Country was its own little thriving community. Our friends worked there, my sister joining them when she turned 14 years and nine months. She worked with people our parents knew, teenage girls we played netball with and older boys she never would've dared to speak to otherwise. You'd always know when there was a school social or formal coming up in Warwick — Target Country would be teeming with young people ready to spend their casual job wages. "It was probably one of the only places in Warwick where teenage girls could buy a cute top or skirt because it was trying to be fashionable but it was also pretty affordable," my sister remembers. For some, it offered something even more, including for one local who was getting married. "She bought her bridesmaids their dresses at Target Country," my sister says. "I can still remember it was a pale orange synthetic silk dress with thin straps. It came below the knee and had quite a flowy skirt. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "All the bridesmaids came in and tried them on and it was a really exciting day for everyone." For us bush kids, Target Country introduced us to a whole new world of homewares, toys and electronics. We learned to navigate the concept of laybuy. We had a broader range of bras to choose from. We could even buy activewear. How would we — and many other rural communities — feel if we lost Target Country? Like we'd lost a part of our little town — and our history. 
