COVID-19 worries and study stress 'just not healthy' for HSC students, but there are signs of resilience
Uncertainty has been one of the most challenging hallmarks of COVID-19 for Year 12 student Olivia Condon. During the hours spent in online lessons, the 17-year-old found it impossible to stop her mind from worrying about the future. "I felt really anxious, thinking 'Am I going to get a bad mark, when are we going back to school?'," she said. "My mind was constantly asking questions I couldn't answer." She is one of thousands of high school students across the country dealing with a global pandemic while preparing for the most important exams of their young lives. Youth workers say instances of self-harm and suicidal thoughts have risen significantly among young people in recent months. While some students have remained resilient, the upheaval has prompted calls for education providers to focus more on wellbeing than marks. For Olivia, the low point came shortly after she stopped going to classes in early April. "It was really hard to keep doing work because stress just kept piling up and you didn't get a break, you were stressed but you still had to do the work," she said. She also worried about classmates with difficult home lives. "The only thing that kept them going was school and seeing their friends, so COVID had such a negative impact for them," she said. The coronavirus outbreak has caused an unprecedented increase in demand for mental health support services for young people. The Kids Helpline reported a 40 per cent rise in demand for counselling services in March. Project Youth supports at-risk young people in Sydney's south with crisis accommodation, employment, and respite from troubles at home. Operations manager Kevin Crowe said the amount of young people needing assistance had never been greater, with referrals coming from as far away as Victoria. "It's been a nightmare to be honest," he said. "We've had a big increase in anxiety and depression … suicidal ideation and self-harming. "We've had an increase in referrals, especially for kids under 16 who are not able to stay at home — it's quite frightening actually."  Despite efforts to provide online tutoring, Mr Crowe said many students trying to complete their secondary education will drop out due to complications caused by COVID-19. "They're falling through the gaps, which is very sad," he said.  It's an escalation that did not surprise Will Stubley from Year 13, an organisation that helps young people transition from school to adult life. In recent months, his staff have been inundated with concerned students looking for clarity in their final year. Mr Stubley said the focus on academia in the final years of high school forced an unhealthy amount of pressure onto young people. "Adding COVID on top, it's just not healthy … that stress and anxiety is not necessarily warranted," he said. Despite the upheaval, there are signs that students are learning to better support each other. Year 12 student Jakub Kamen said the time away from school had taught him the value of reaching out to those who were struggling. "I definitely noticed more people have been down in the dumps, so I would check on a few people, ask how they were going," he said. "You've got to make sure people around you are OK and let them know you're there for them." Olivia said she had also been more emotionally open with her classmates. "Since being at home I've found it so important to check up on people, even if you didn't talk to them much before," she said. "It's been a positive response, I've made friends with people I wouldn't necessarily be close with before." It was a pleasing response for Mr Stubley, who hoped that COVID-19 shutdowns would reinforce the importance of student welfare over marks. "School helps young people become an independent contributor to society and that has come much more to the fore now," he said. "The emphasis has shifted to 'How can we help these young people navigate the period after school?' "That should be the focus anyway." 
