Australia's coronavirus recovery has many competing values on the table
Half the workforce is now receiving either the JobSeeker or JobKeeper payment. The Australian Government is pumping more cash into the economy as a percentage of GDP than nearly any other country.  And now Josh Frydenberg has declared "there is no money tree". It may sound like an odd declaration from a Treasurer who had no problem whistling up hundreds of billions of dollars in a matter of weeks, but the point Frydenberg is trying to make is that the spending cannot continue. When six months of support payments are up, that's it. The Government will go no further. It will then rely on the Coalition's cupboard of policy "principles and values" to shift nearly 7 million Australians from support payments back into sustainable jobs. Just before he coughed up a lung at the dispatch box on Tuesday, the Treasurer spoke of the "proven path" for growing the economy.  "The values and the principles that have guided Coalition reforms in the past must guide us again in the future," Frydenberg said, listing tax and workplace reform, cutting red tape and upskilling as sure-fire ways to generate some growth. It's too early to know where the Government will land on the specifics here, but perhaps we should look at the Coalition's reform legacy as a guide, given the Treasurer's invitation to do so. The reform record is a patchy one, with a few unhappy memories many on the Coalition side would no doubt rather forget. There were the attempts to deregulate university fees, introduce a GP co-payment, establish a National Energy Guarantee and cut the company tax rate for big business. Each of these ideas bit the dust in the face of internal or opposition resistance.  On other fronts the Coalition has had more success: trimming superannuation perks, cutting income taxes and lowering company tax for smaller firms. In different ways, these successful and unsuccessful measures all involved a smaller role for government.  It's no coincidence that the Prime Minister now talks about a "business-led recovery" rather than a government one. The Coalition hasn't always been able to get its way, but it's maintained a consistent principle of looking for a smaller role for the state. The past few months have been quite the anomaly. The Government is now playing a far bigger role in the economy than ever before, but as it eyes the recovery, the Prime Minister and Treasurer want it known the various support payments for workers, the unemployed, childcare services, pensioners and apprentices are only temporary. By contrast, Anthony Albanese sees an ongoing need for big government, warning against the "law of the jungle and unfettered market forces" as Australia charts its path to recovery.  In a speech to caucus on Monday, the Labor leader pointed to the ALP's "values of fairness, security and the power of government to change lives" as the best way forward. So what reform ideas have these Labor values produced in recent years? We've seen ambitious plans to super-charge spending on education, health, dental care and childcare. All of this was to be paid for by stripping back negative gearing and franking credit tax breaks and increasing tax on the highest income earners.  The problem is, voters didn't like it. At least not enough to stop them punishing Labor with three consecutive election defeats. Since becoming Opposition Leader 12 months ago, Anthony Albanese has been contemplating how to adjust Labor's policy mix. He's been criticised for moving too slowly, but it's probably a good thing he didn't settle on any fixed positions before the game-changing COVID crisis came along.  Now he has an opportunity to weigh up what the post-COVID economy needs and what voters want. It's still far too early to know exactly what the economy will look like as restrictions are eased; which businesses will be viable, what might happen to the global economy and whether the trade relationship with China will recover or continue to deteriorate.  Specific reform proposals are unlikely to emerge from either side until the lay of the land is clearer. Right now, we have competing "values". The Coalition wants a business-led recovery, Labor prefers an ongoing government-led path to growth. The Eden-Monaro by-election may provide some clues as to whether voters have a preference. David Speers is the host of Insiders, which airs on ABC TV at 9am on Sunday or on iview. 
