Coronavirus distancing restrictions to ease across Queensland for Mother's Day
Queensland will again ease COVID-19 contact restrictions from Mother's Day this Sunday to allow up to five members from one household to visit another home. "We don't think that will increase risk. It's about one household going to another household," Chief Medical Officer Jeannette Young said. But Dr Young urged people to maintain their distance when visiting other people and to avoid hugging or getting too close "wherever possible". "If you've got different households coming together, try to keep that social distance," she said. "So yes, when you go and visit, because we all want to keep our mums safe — I know I do — it's a good idea to just delay those hugs until we get through all this. "Within a household, of course hug each other but if you've got different households coming together, try and maintain that social distance, it's just being extra cautious but very appropriate." Multiple families can visit the same household as long as it is as different times. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said the easing of restrictions from Mother's Day was happening because "Queensland has been doing such a great job". "I really want to thank Queenslanders for a great job that they have been doing right across our state and I think this is going to be welcomed by families, especially on Mother's Day, starting this Sunday," Ms Palaszczuk said. Latest information from Queensland Health. Dr Young said the 50-kilometre limit on travel would also be lifted "if you're visiting another household". "But you can't go out into that community. You can only go to that residence, visit there, and leave," Dr Young said.  Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "You can't go shopping, you can't go to the beach." Dr Young said there were two new cases of COVID-19 confirmed overnight, and that 4,665 Queenslander had been tested in the past 24 hours. Both new cases were on the Gold Coast, one of them linked to a cruise ship. Dr Young said Queensland only had 50 active cases, eight of whom were in hospital. She said despite a "few little breakouts" with the first easing of restrictions last weekend, people were getting the message. "All of these things are dependent on people hearing the message and continuing to do the great job they've done," Dr Young said. "If all of a sudden we end up with a lot of problems or a lot of cases, then we'd have to rethink, but I expect that won't happen. "This is all part of our strategy to get society, as much as possible, back to as much as it can do. "It won't be where we were pre-COVID, that won't happen for quite a while down the track, but we'll gradually see things moving back towards normal business". The Premier was due to meet with representatives from the hospitality industry on Thursday.  But she said a decision about reopening cafes, bars, restaurants and clubs would depend on advice from Friday's National Cabinet meeting. 
