Working from home from parents' cattle station for London events planner Ali Lord
When the coronavirus pandemic began, Ali Lord decided the best place to be was her parents' cattle station in North Queensland. The London-based events planner packed up her laptop and made the 17-day commute — including a 14-day quarantine period — to the other side of the world. She is now working remotely for the foreseeable future. "I left London because my new visa got held up due to coronavirus, which meant that I couldn't work in London until that came through," Ms Lord said. "That time period is looking like two to three months." With more than 32,000 deaths due to COVID-19, the United Kingdom is one of Europe's worst impacted countries. "Being in lockdown in London wasn't too appealing," she said. "You're talking a small two-storey flat and you're allowed outside for 30 minutes a day for your exercise. "Seeing a city like London, to see streets empty, to see the CBD completely bare is something I hope I've never got to see again in my lifetime." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. After spending two weeks in quarantine at a hotel in Sydney, Ms Lord set up her office on Sutherland Station, near Richmond. Her skills have been put to good use on both sides of the world, with the 14 station staff unable to leave and the rodeos and horse races in the area cancelled. "North Queensland has a great reputation for having an incredibly fun social period," she said. "It's really important for our team here that we do have those social moments and it's not just about long days of work." Together with her mother, Kacie, Ms Lord has been running quiz nights and tennis tournaments with the staff, who all live together. "I come up with the ideas and she just puts them into action," Kacie Lord said. "Everybody jumps on board and helps with the cooking or rolling the tennis court." Kacie Lord is also the president of the local Richmond Field Days, a three-day event that has been cancelled due to the pandemic. "It's the biggest event in the Richmond district and it's an iconic event for the whole of the north," she said. "This event's been going for 35 years and nothing has ever stopped it before — no floods, no droughts." Ms Lord was hoping to bring the event back to its former glory next year. "This is my third year doing it and I'm just finding my feet," she said. By that time, Ali Lord is hoping to be back working with her colleagues in London. "I've got a few obstacles to overcome," she said. "But hopefully I'll go back to London for a year or two and then we'll see what happens." 
