Coronavirus update: Japan set to unveil second stimulus package worth more than 100 trillion yen
The Japanese Government is reportedly putting the final touches on a relief package worth more than $1 trillion as the country's economy prepares for its worst slump since World War II. Meanwhile, Europeans and Americans took advantage of the first holiday weekend since coronavirus restrictions were eased, while British Prime Minister Boris Johnson voiced his support for Dominic Cummings, his senior adviser who travelled across England during the lockdown. This story will be regularly updated throughout Monday. Japan is finalising a coronavirus relief package worth more than 100 trillion yen ($1.4 trillion), following last month's 117-trillion-yen stimulus, according to reports in the Nikkei newspaper. The package, to be funded by a second extra budget for the current fiscal year beginning in April, would be the latest effort by Tokyo to support an economy on track for its deepest slump since World War II, as the pandemic crushes businesses and consumer spending. Japan ended state of emergency measures for most regions and plans to hold a panel discussion on Monday to decide whether to lift them in remaining places, including Tokyo. "Japan's economy is in an extremely severe state and we need to pull out of this situation as soon as we can," Finance Minister Taro Aso said last week. The Government is expected to approve the budget after Japan's economy slipped into recession in the last quarter, with analysts expecting another 22 per cent contraction in April-June due to the hit from the health crisis. The deepening pain from the pandemic is forcing the Government to add to Japan's huge debt pile, which is already twice the size of its economy, to pay for big spending plans. According to a study by Columbia University economics professor Ceyhun Elgin, Japan has some of the most aggressive relief spending of any country, with its last package worth more than 20 per cent of the country's GDP. That compares to around 14 per cent in the US and 11 per cent in Australia spent on bailouts and stimulus. The Birdsville races, known as the Melbourne Cup of the outback, will not go ahead this year due to coronavirus concerns. Famous for its dusty track in the Simpson Desert, the two-day event draws thousands of people to the small town in Queensland's Diamantina Shire, which normally has a population of just 115 people. The races were set to be held on September 4 and 5, but have been cancelled in a devastating blow for the town's economy. "As much as we were holding onto the hope that we could run them, we're at a point where we've had to concede defeat. The health of our patrons, and those who live in Outback Queensland, is of paramount importance to us and it is impossible to know what the status with COVID-19 will be come September," Birdsville Race Club president Gary Brook said. "We have been following the Queensland Government's roadmap for easing of restrictions, and with the easing of restrictions on mass gatherings not currently part of the roadmap, it is too much of a stretch to expect that by September we could safely host thousands of people in Birdsville." Birdsville has hosted the races since 1882 but it was last cancelled as recently as 2007, due to equine influenza. The 2021 edition of the races has been pencilled in for September 3 and 4, when organisers are hoping for a record crowd thanks to a possible boom in domestic tourism. The Government does not plan to expand the criteria or the timeframe for JobKeeeper and JobSeeker payments introduced during the pandemic, according to the Treasurer. Despite the Government having to spend $60 billion less than expected on JobKeeper payments due to errors made by businesses filling out applications, Josh Frydenberg told News Breakfast there were no plans for "wholesale changes". Mr Frydenberg emphasised both the new JobKeeper program and the boosted JobSeeker payment (formerly Newstart) are "temporary, targeted and proportionate to the challenge we face". He did, however, flag that the tourism sector could be in need of more assistance, with international borders set to remain closed even as the rest of the country opens up, which would be a topic of conversation at a scheduled review of JobKeeper next month. "The tourism sector could be one sector in need of further support. That's what we'll look at in the context of the economic situation at the time. You'll continue to see our international borders closed for some time," he said. "It's estimated some 850,000 people will be back in work as a result of those three stages of restrictions being lifted. That's the way to get people back into a job."  Europeans soaked up plenty of sun where they could over the weekend, as governments grappled with how and when to safely let in foreign travellers to salvage the vital summer tourist season. Across Europe, a mishmash of travel restrictions appears to be on the horizon, often depending on where travellers live and what passports they carry.  Germany, France and other countries aim to open their borders for European travel in mid-June, but it isn't clear when intercontinental travel will resume. Spain, one of the worst-hit countries in the pandemic and also one of the world's top destinations for international travellers, says it won't reopen for foreign tourists until July. In Germany, domestic tourists will be allowed to return to Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania in the north-east — home to the country's Baltic Sea coast — and to hotels in Berlin this week. The La Grande-Motte resort beach in France came up with a way to control its usual weekend crowds by introducing a booking system. Beachgoers must pre-book an 8-square-metre patch of sand online, and that area will will be roped off to keep them a safe distance from others. Reservations are free but required, and there is already a two-day waiting list. In Paris, where all city parks remain closed, locals soaked up the sun along the embankments of the Seine River and lounged on ledges outside the Tuileries Gardens.  From Thursday, the White House will start denying admission to foreigners who have been in Brazil during the two-week period before they hoped to enter the US, broadening its travel ban against countries hit hardest by coronavirus. President Donald Trump had already banned travel from the United Kingdom, Europe and China, and flagged last week that he was considering similar restrictions for Brazil. The US leads the world in the number of confirmed cases, with more than 1.6 million, followed by Brazil (363,000) and Russia (344,000). An adviser to Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro said the restrictions followed previously established benchmarks, playing down the move from Mr Trump, whose support Mr Bolsonaro has touted. "There is nothing specific against Brazil. We hope that'll be temporary," tweeted Filipe Martins, an advisor on international affairs to the Brazilian President. Press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said Mr Trump's latest move was designed to "protect our country", which is expected to pass 100,000 coronavirus deaths in coming days. As with the other bans, it does not apply to legal permanent residents or spouses, parents or children of US citizens or legal permanent residents. Brazil has recorded more than 22,000 deaths — the fifth highest tally in the world. The Memorial Day weekend, which marks the unofficial start of summer in the US, meant big crowds at beaches and warnings from authorities about people disregarding the coronavirus social-distancing rules. Americans traditionally spend the weekend travelling to beaches, gathering at backyard barbecues and unfurling picnic blankets in parks. Among those soaking in the sun and enjoying a bit of travel on Saturday was President Donald Trump, who was seen golfing at his Trump National Golf Club in northern Virginia, his first golf outing since the White House declared a national emergency over the coronavirus outbreak in March. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson has backed senior adviser Dominic Cummings, despite calls from within his own Conservative Party for the aide to resign for travelling more than 400 kilometres during the coronavirus lockdown.  "I conclude that in travelling to find the right kind of childcare, at the moment when both he and his wife were about to be incapacitated by coronavirus, and when he had no alternative — I think he followed the instincts of every father, and every parent. And I do not mark him down for that.," Mr Johnson said. "I believe that in every respect he has acted responsibly and legally." Mr Cummings, who masterminded the 2016 Brexit campaign, came under pressure after it emerged that he had travelled from London to Durham in late March while showing symptoms of COVID-19, when Britain was under a strict lockdown to combat the outbreak. Since players returned to limited group training earlier this week, eight positive tests for the virus have been confirmed at England's top football clubs. Six individuals, including Watford defender Adrian Mariappa and Burnley assistant manager Ian Woan, were positive in the first round of testing on May 17-18. A Bournemouth player was one of two people working for Premier League clubs who tested positive following a second batch of testing No matches have been played in the Premier League since March, but the UK Government has given the go-ahead for elite sport to resume from June 1. The Premier League's Project Restart envisages a return to competitive action in June, although no date has been fixed. Similarly, the Spanish La Liga competition has been given the green light by Spanish authorities to return to action from June 8. All organised soccer in Spain was provisionally suspended on March 12, although clubs in the top two divisions have since returned to group training. La Liga has yet to officially confirm a date on which it will resume, although its president Javier Tebas had said previously he hoped the season could restart on June 12. ABC/wires 
