Wedding celebrants suffer as couples put marriage on hold during coronavirus pandemic
The coronavirus pandemic has served up a double dose of disappointment for one marriage celebrant from Ballarat in central Victoria. Kate Ritchie, who has presided over ceremonies for 12 years, has not only taken an economic hit from cancelled and postponed ceremonies, but her own wedding to her fiance David, slated for April 9, had to be put on the backburner too. "We had decided it was probably not in the best interest of some of our family members to [carry on with the ceremony]," she said. "I didn't want my wedding to be remembered because Gran got sick or Grandpa got sick. "We had our little cry and then we put on our big girl undies and kept marching on." The couple now hope to exchange their vows early next year. "It's going to be a challenge to fit into that dress," Ms Ritchie said. "It fit me then but I don't think it will fit me after winter. "We're lucky … not many people get to look forward to their wedding twice. "We had months of looking forward to the wedding that was originally organised and now we get that excitement all over again." While the restrictions have forced some of Ms Ritchie's clients to change their wedding plans, she has been grateful the timing of the lockdown only affected the tail end of Ballarat's wedding season. The weddings that Ms Ritchie has officiated during the coronavirus pandemic have been restricted to five people, which included the bride, groom and celebrant.  In Victoria, guest numbers have now been lifted to 10, plus the couple. Bindi Irwin ties the knot at Australia Zoo, just before the Federal Government's restrictions on the number of wedding guests that came into force at midnight. "A lot of extra thinking has gone on — we've got hand sanitiser and wipes for the pens and we've got to stand this far [1.5 metres] away," she said. "Even things like signing documents [have had to be considered]. "It's really hard to show someone where they need to sign the document when you can't get within 1.5 metres of them. "I've never had so many little sticky notes over the documentation." This month the Federal Government announced it was waiving registration fees for celebrants from July 1. Ms Ritchie said the move was a welcome relief for many in her industry. While some treat being a celebrant as a side hustle, many celebrants work full-time in the profession. Bendigo celebrant, Rosemary Taylor, said she had one wedding cancelled, another that went ahead during the lockdown, and a couple of ceremonies rescheduled for next year. She said one couple planned to come down from Brisbane and have the wedding in Bendigo because the bride had family there. "She rang me and said, 'We're going to cancel the whole thing and just have a registry office wedding on the Gold Coast'," Mrs Taylor said. "They just decided to keep it low key. "There are other brides [and grooms] that are just waiting to see and hoping it will be ok." Mrs Taylor has a wedding booked for June 21, but it was still up in the air. "It has [affected business] but it's swings and roundabouts," she said. "I'll probably be twice as busy next year." Where and when you have your wedding in Australia will dictate how many invites you are allowed to send out. The Northern Territory has not specified a limit on outdoor weddings, and in Queensland the current 10-person limit is set to increase to 20 from June 12 and up to 100 from July 10. West Australian weddings can have up to 20 people inside or 30 people outside. Ten guests can also attend a wedding in New South Wales right now, not including the couple, celebrant and photographer. Victoria has a similar rule; 10 guests plus the couple and celebrant and the same applies in Tasmania. The Australian Capital Territory also has a 10-person rule for weddings but it differs slightly in that the number includes the couple, but does not include the celebrant and photographer. South Australia also includes the couple in their 10-person limit but not the celebrant or "necessary staff". 
