Coronavirus lockdown to lift on June 5 for NT remote communities, Chief Minister says
The Northern Territory Government has confirmed restrictions on travel within the NT will be lifted on June 5. Chief Minister Michael Gunner said the Biosecurity Act — limiting travel to remote communities — would be removed almost two weeks ahead of schedule after consultation with land councils and traditional owners. "We can lift our biosecurity zones safely because of our strict border controls. It's been weeks since we've had a new case, and Territorians are doing the right thing," Mr Gunner wrote on Facebook. "I know it hasn't been easy, but soon, Territorians will be able to move freely between communities and come into town and return home again without having to quarantine." Mr Gunner said the NT's interstate travel restrictions would remain in place indefinitely and the Queensland, WA and South Australian borders would stay closed. The Biosecurity Act was originally due to expire on June 18, but land councils lobbied strongly for the restrictions to lift on June 5 — the same day as stage-three coronavirus restriction easing in the Northern Territory. In advocating the June 5 date, Central Land Council chief executive Joe Martin-Jard said the isolation of residents in remote communities was creating barriers to essential supplies, including warm clothing. "We don't want to see double standards emerging where people could get a laksa at Parap Markets and have a bet at the pub from June 5, but the community mob are still locked in," Mr Martin-Jard said. The NT Government moved swiftly to restrict access to remote communities, where Indigenous populations suffer disproportionate levels of chronic disease that are risk factors for coronavirus. Following the announcement of relaxed travel restrictions within the Territory, the NT Government launched a tourism initiative encouraging residents to "get out and enjoy their backyard". Tourism Minister Lauren Moss said the $200,000 campaign dubbed 'Time to be a Territorian' would nudge NT residents to spend on local holidays and provide operators with some relief from the multi-million-dollar revenue blackhole left due to interstate and international border closures. "Over the last few months we've sacrificed a lot to keep Territorians safe. We've looked out for each other, and now we need to keep looking out for each other by experiencing as much of our own backyard as we can," Ms Moss said. "Following [the] announcement that biosecurity restrictions will be removed from 5 June, we are encouraging locals to begin planning experiences like a fishing charter, a water cruise, a cultural experience or an overnight stay, which are crucial to supporting our tourism sector. "It's still going to be incredibly tough, because obviously we have a smaller population in the Territory, but I think this will help tour operators adapt to what the new normal looks like for them." Ms Moss said she believed remote communities would "welcome the opportunity to travel freely around the NT and welcome people back into their communities". "We know that land councils and traditional owners have been working with both levels of government on the lifting of biosecurity zones," she said. 
