Canberra's coronavirus field hospital looks likely to go unused — and authorities say that's the best possible outcome
It belongs amid the ruins of a war-torn city, or in a rural village grappling with the horrors of famine. Instead, it sits on a suburban cricket field, in the heart of an affluent city, in one of the richest and most developed nations on Earth. It was built to prop up a healthcare system, facing a test for which it was not prepared. But the pop-up emergency department, constructed in just 37 days beside the Canberra Hospital on Garran Oval, will now likely sit idle and may never see a patient. According to the decision-makers who commissioned the $23 million project, it was an insurance policy, taken out as they faced an escalating health crisis both across the globe and within Australia. And they say that as the call was made, they feared it might already be too little, too late. To understand why the facility was built, we need to think back just eight weeks. The idea was first raised on March 20, and a decision was made to push ahead with building the facility on March 22.  ACT Health Minister Rachel Stephen-Smith said politicians were watching case numbers soar, nationwide. "In Australia … we were starting to get really increased numbers of COVID-19 cases, day on day," she said. "And we were on that exponential part of the curve of COVID-19 cases." Advice was being handed to National Cabinet around what sort of capacity might be needed, which was then being passed on to state and territory health systems to transform into reality. Hospital capacity, particularly in intensive care, would in some cases need to double or even triple. Maps were drawn outlining how capacity could be extended across the ACT's health system, but Ms Stephen-Smith said they knew time was not a luxury they could afford. "What we had seen in other countries around the world was, by time they needed to make decisions to expand their health system capacity, it was too late," she said. "They were already overwhelmed. "It was really clear to us that we could not afford to be in that situation, that we had to ensure that our health system would have the capacity to cope with what we saw potentially coming down the track." And she, along with counterparts across the country, feared they may have already been caught out. "I think at that time I, and health ministers around the country, and first ministers, were extremely concerned that it was already too late," she said. "That all of the measures we were putting in place wouldn't be quick enough to actually flatten that curve, and that we would see hundreds and thousands of cases of COVID-19 in each of our major cities." Inside the health system, by late March, the global coronavirus situation was already having a clear impact locally. Supply chains for critical medical equipment were breaking down world-wide, and Canberra staff were anxious. Ordinary surgical masks, which usually cost 17 cents, skyrocketed in price to over $1. And where you could usually order as many as needed, and have them delivered in less than 24 hours, orders were being placed with no confidence as to when they might arrive. Deputy CEO of Canberra Health Services Dave Peffer said those were the circumstances decisions were being made in, and no one knew what was coming next. "Things were moving so rapidly that at that point in time, the uncertainty was so great, you really had to plan for what could potentially be a catastrophe," he said. Aspen Medical was contracted to build a pop-up emergency facility, and Garran Oval — directly across the road from Canberra Hospital — was identified as the best possible site. It would be 51 beds, and act as an emergency ward dedicated to both suspected and confirmed COVID-19 patients. On April 2, the facility was publicly announced, and fences were erected around where the site would stand. A total of $23 million was budgeted for the construction and operation, and the ACT Government would take ownership of the facility and all equipment. The World Health Organisation was consulted during the design and construction phase for advice. As an emergency department, it would both treat and triage patients — with all patients leaving within 24 hours, either discharged or admitted to another ward of the hospital. Among the 51 beds, six were equipped for resuscitation, and one for palliative care. Mr Peffer said as they looked abroad, it seemed like exactly the sort of facility that might be required. "We had health services around the world, good health services, crumbling under the weight of a pandemic," he said. "And the lessons we took away from that is often it was governments moving too slowly. "Where we had a situation with health services being underprepared, under resourced, and then very quickly overwhelmed. "The decision that was taken here was we weren't going to follow that path." The field hospital was assembled with extraordinary speed, and made from parts that could eventually be pulled apart and stored in shipping containers. The keys were handed to Canberra Health Services this week, but, beyond security guards, it largely sits empty. Beds line the halls and curtains hang from the roof, while a small array of medical equipment sits on shelves. Were it to be needed, it would take another three weeks to activate — with staff, gear, medicine and other necessities to be brought online. With no active cases of coronavirus in the ACT, that now seems unlikely. Instead, the hospital will probably be disassembled at the end of the flu season, packed up and sold to whoever needs it next. It is, undoubtedly, an expensive insurance policy. If it is not activated, the final cost will come in around $14 million, rather than $23 million. It is also unusual. Few similar facilities are being built around Australia, although the ACT Government pointed to a project at Monash Hospital in Victoria as an example. Despite this, Ms Stephen-Smith said it was the right response. "This is a global pandemic of the size that we haven't seen for 100 years, and it wouldn't be reasonable to build a health system with enough capacity to respond to a once in 100-year pandemic, and then have it sitting there empty for most of the time," she said. "That actually wouldn't be a good way to manage the public's resources and to plan in our health system." 
