How WA coronavirus health operations chief Liz McLeod readied the state for an unprecedented pandemic
As Liz McLeod looks back on the past 12 weeks, she feels as though she has been given the gift of time. She watched as a never-before-seen virus broke out and began to spread across the world, killing at first hundreds, then thousands of people as it edged closer and closer to Western Australia. She was about to face a massive professional upheaval. Latest information from the WA Health Department Mrs McLeod was pulled from her role as chief executive of the East Metropolitan Health Service and found herself in a newly-created role — the chief executive of COVID Health Operations.  This made her the head of the team responsible for making sure Western Australia's hospitals and health system were ready for whatever COVID-19 brought with it. And that was a whole lot of unknowns. "One of the challenges we had in this whole process has really been a lack of modelling of what we were going to expect," she says. "It's been quite a moving plan in terms of understanding how many people we thought were going to be coming to our hospitals and also when they were going to be coming." Like the rest of the world, Mrs McLeod saw images of hospitals being overwhelmed in China, Italy and New York. She saw countries running out of hospital equipment like life-saving ventilators, while medical staff were rationing PPE (personal protective equipment). It was now her job to make sure those scenes weren't repeated in Western Australia.  "We were always thinking we were two weeks away from a very large surge of patients arriving," she says. WA hospitals have an emergency plan that is updated regularly, but Mrs McLeod says it was quickly evident that COVID-19 was a different beast and preparations would have to be unlike anything West Australians had seen. "What we knew was that COVID spreads quickly and we get that exponential growth in people with COVID," she says. Early advice for her team was to triple the state's hospital emergency department capacity and double the number of intensive care beds. "We had to work hard and we had to work fast to be as ready as we could be," she says. By March 10, WA had six confirmed cases of the virus and special COVID clinics were set up to test people returning from overseas who had flu-like symptoms. "We were all obviously watching the news and looking to our international colleagues and the evidence of what was happening internationally," Mrs McLeod says. COVID Health Operations, Mrs McLeod's team, made the decision to prepare 660 ICU beds — four times Western Australia's regular capacity. A few days later, as West Australians hit the supermarkets and began panic-buying groceries, her team was busy scrambling to purchase more ventilators for those beds. "Along with being busier in our hospitals, we were also expecting that more of our staff would have been impacted as well," she says When health staff began to fall ill and, in some cases, die overseas, they realised they could have an even bigger challenge on their hands. In anticipation, they launched a statewide recruitment drive. West Australians answered that call in their thousands — more than 7,000 of them applied. By the last week of March, WA was recording between 20 and 44 cases a day and the curve was going up. Her team was working around the clock, long days that bled into weeks.  But then, Western Australia turned a corner. On March 24, WA closed its interstate border and, by the start of April, even travel within the state was restricted. Along with 14-day quarantine periods introduced for people coming into the state, it meant rates of infection began to slow. WA has closed its borders to the east for the first time in history. Here's how you might be affected. "We were certainly expecting it to be a lot busier than what eventuated," Mrs McLeod says. By the start of May, WA had recorded its first full week with no new coronavirus cases. "We look back at it and it has been an extraordinary effort — the fantastic public health response and the fantastic response of the public has given us the gift of time," she says. Fortunately for Mrs McLeod and her team, the elusive two-week surge has still not eventuated. But that doesn't mean her team will rest easy.  "I think we're winning, but I don't think we're there yet. We've still got a long way to go — this is a marathon, not a sprint," she says. Western Australia started to ease more restrictions from May 18, with people allowed back into pubs, cafes and gyms, students heading back to school and some intrastate borders reopened.  Here's a guide to help you work out what will be allowed from May 18 and what is still off limits. Now hospitals remain on alert for a second wave of infection. "We are still expecting there to be cases so we will maintain our alertness and readiness for some time," Mrs McLeod says. It's that gift of time she speaks of that has allowed her team to get ahead of demand and even update their emergency plans.  "We have to balance our optimism with caution, so we have to remain vigilant and remain ready to respond," she says. While a vaccination for COVID-19 remains a distant promise, she has one message for the people of WA. "We haven't finished yet, I think we are still only in the early days of COVID." 
