Muslims struggling through coronavirus helped with food parcels during Ramadan
For many families, the evening meal during the month of Ramadan is a time of joy and reflection spent with friends and family.  Prayers at packed mosques, warm hugs and mouth-watering foods a traditional centrepiece.  Muslims across Australia are breaking their day-long fasts differently this year because of coronavirus — and a food deployment operation is helping members of the community who are struggling.  Yusra Metwally is a few hours into her fast as she packs eggs into a food hamper going out with others to Western Sydney suburbs.  The box is halal-friendly and specifically designed for Muslim communities. Ms Metwally knows some will be using this food to celebrate their own iftars — the evening meal in which Muslims end their daily Ramadan fast. "I'm experiencing Ramadan for the first time in isolation and it's been so strange because usually it's such a social time where you break your fast with others.  "But I've come to terms with a changed Ramadan. While we've lost the usual elements like the mosques and socialisation — we haven't lost that sense of community.  Ms Metwally is a volunteer at Addison Road Community Centre Organisation (ARCCO) in Marrickville which seven weeks ago turned into a major food deployment operation to reach vulnerable community members during the COVID-19 crisis.  The community hall which used to hold social functions is now full of fresh fruit and vegetables, refrigerators of eggs and milk and hundreds of cans.  It works like clockwork with volunteers physically distanced at each station as food is packed, labelled, and delivered into vans. Chief Executive of ARCCO Rosanna Barbero is comfortable with managing big-picture logistics in crisis.  She's worked for the United Nations and Oxfam aid operations across the Middle East, Asia and Africa for the last three decades.  "In a couple of hours we repurposed the empty Addison Road community hall into the headquarters — because we knew we'd have to deploy food immediately because people would be in need.  "Particularly those people who have fallen through the cracks or lost jobs." ARCCO has no government funding — and relies on donations and volunteers during this pandemic.  It is focused on servicing gaps in the stimulus packages — targeting refugee and asylum-seeker communities, international students, sex workers and even tourists.  It has been working in food security since 2015 but never quite at this scale.  "This definitely mirrors deployment operations I've worked on," Ms Barbero said. The boxes that Ms Metwally packed are in a van parked in Belmore.  Syeda Shah, a mother of five is one of the first to receive one.  Ms Shah and her family are asylum seekers from northern Pakistan — fleeing persecution for their religion in which the minority Shia-Muslim group are targeted. For the family who live in Georges Hall, food security has always been an issue in their seven years in Australia on bridging visas with minimal government support.  However, the worry to feed her kids this Ramadan increased as prices went up or stock sold quickly in their local grocery stores due to the crisis.  "It's always a big month for Muslims but we can't afford most things," Ms Shah said. "But right now, it's even harder as most prices are up for spices, for rice."  Addison Road was a lifeline. Particularly as extra costs pile up like pre-paid data packs for her husband and their children to rely on to complete studies from home.  They cannot afford a monthly internet plan.  "It's really helped. We've got plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables, and tinned food," Ms Shah said. "Without this we don't have access to fruits and veggies. This the fruit we put in my kids' lunchboxes the days they go to school." But what Ms Shah loves most is the fact she's always made to feel resilient. "They respect everyone. When they give food they give it with love.  "They never use words like poor or that they're helping 'people like us' which charities often use." While she misses the social gatherings — the work the organisation is doing has embodied the values of Ramadan she holds close.  "Fasting in the time of Ramadan is important as you can understand hunger and the stress of other people who may not have enough food.  "What they're doing here is so important."  
