What the WHA is and why it could be very important for an inquiry into the coronavirus pandemic
As the coronavirus pandemic continues a dominate global politics, another health entity has entered the discussion. While the World Health Organization (WHO) has been the focus of the fight against COVID-19, Federal Health Minister Greg Hunt has highlighted the World Health Assembly (WHA) as a focus in the near future. The WHA does not get a lot of publicity, but it could become significant in global politics in the coming days. What is the WHA?The WHA is an annual meeting of all 194 members of the WHO. The assembly is held every May, with delegates from each nation travelling to the Swiss city of Geneva to meet and make decisions on global health, according to the WHO website. This year's event will be the 73rd edition of the assembly, but due to coronavirus, it will be held online. It will be held on May 18-19 — so tonight and Tuesday night, Australian time. According to the WHO website, COVID-19 will take up the majority of the discussion. There are several objectives at each assembly. Making decisions about global health issues is the main objective. These decisions are important because they will direct the policies of the WHO for the next 12 months. Decisions are ordinarily dictated by the WHA executive board, a group of 34 health professionals appointed to the role. Dr Lisa Studdert is Australia's representative on the executive board. Members also elect a president and five vice-presidents of the WHA for the next year. Why is the WHA in the news?Australia, along with other countries including the United States, has called for an independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus pandemic. The WHA meeting will consider a motion, drafted by the European Union, calling for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of the "international health response to COVID-19". Mr Hunt is expecting around 120 other nations to back that call. Calls for an inquiry have angered China, which has started a trade dispute with Australia. Chinese media is reporting that President Xi Jinping will deliver a speech at the WHA opening ceremony, at the invitation of WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. The United States has not said if it will back the motion. The ABC understands that United States diplomats are pressing for tougher language that calls for a probe into how the virus started in China. But Australian diplomats do not expect the US to vote against the motion as it stands. US President Donald Trump has repeatedly accused China of covering up the outbreak and allow coronavirus to spread around the world. Has there been any other news about the WHA?The island of roughly 23 million will again not have a seat at the table when the assembly starts. As it is considered part of China, Taiwan is represented by delegates from Beijing. But Taiwan wants a seat at the table and has attended as an observer in the past. Taiwan's Foreign Ministry earlier this month complained that official coronavirus data and prevention methods it had provided to the WHO were not being shared with the international body's member states. World leaders including Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and Canada's Justin Trudeau have called for WHO to grant Taiwan full membership. The US State Department has campaigned for the WHO to allow Taiwan a place at the table. Australia, too, backs Taiwan joining the organisation, but only as an observer. Today Reuters reported that Taiwan was shelving its push for observer status in order to allow the WHA to focus on the coronavirus issue. "Despite all our efforts and an unprecedented level of international support, Taiwan has not received an invitation to take part," Foreign Minister Joseph Wu told reporters. "The Ministry of Foreign Affairs expresses deep regret and strong dissatisfaction that the World Health Organization Secretariat has yielded to pressure from the Chinese government and continues to disregard the right to health of the 23 million people of Taiwan."
