Life in coronavirus lockdown brings added heartache for palliative care patients
Kim Bieber broke social and physical distancing rules a few weeks ago and has no regrets. Some might argue she had no choice. "I needed to feel their presence," she says. "My children, my grandchildren. To hold them and tell them I love them." Ms Bieber has terminal cancer and is receiving palliative care. She has been told she has about a week or ten days to live. "It could've been the last time. Every time could be the last time," she says. For several months, the 61-year-old had been enforcing strict social distancing rules. Few people were allowed inside her Fitzroy home in Melbourne's inner north-east, which is decorated with colourful artwork painted by her three grandchildren. The furniture was also moved to ensure that when a nurse or doctor visited, people were kept metres apart. She had been undergoing cancer treatment since Christmas and catching COVID-19, or even the common cold, could have been a death sentence. "We were keeping stricter rules than what you'd see at the supermarket or Queen Victoria Market," she says. "Plus, I didn't want to upset Dan Andrews," she jokes. Even though she needs help from her husband Rafael to walk a few steps, and her speech can be slow, her mind is still quick. But she doesn't joke about how painful isolation from her family has been, as the cancer spread to her brain and the days became shorter and colder. "April was very grey. I hadn't seen my family for months … It was quite a lonely time," she says. "We did Facetime or things like that. It wasn't the same." Thousands of people receiving palliative care in Australia are getting less contact with others, including their nurses, because of the coronavirus restrictions. Anne Myers has been a palliative care nurse with Melbourne City Mission for 14 years. "This is a very difficult situation for people," she says.  "It is bringing in extra ethical and moral decisions for people. What's the best thing to do for a loved one?  "Especially in a PCU [Palliative Care Unit] where only one [a family member] may be allowed to go in." Ms Myers says face-to-face home visits are now only for terminal patients in home care and only then if the family has been screened for coronavirus and if physical-distancing measures are in place. But she says when it comes to treating the dying, and consoling a family, doing it at a distance is difficult. "Eighty per cent of our clients now are probably getting phone calls, whereas before 80 per cent [were] getting visits," she says. "Our role is our relationships with our clients. All that non-verbal stuff … we miss all that and you realise, when you don't have that face-to-face, how needed that is." Ms Bieber makes light of how hard social distancing has been in the grand scheme of things. She says being an "educated white woman" in inner-city Melbourne has given her certain privileges, including receiving palliative care at home. "I have worked with Holocaust survivors," the former psychotherapist says. "I have worked with asylum seekers, refugees. COVID-19 is pretty easy really." She even says having terminal cancer has some positives. Knowing she is dying has allowed her to be more aggressive with financial institutions that she had previously struggled with. "One day someone said to me, 'Just get your husband to do that,' and I had to say, 'Look, I'm dying of brain cancer and he's got dementia. You just need to sort it," she says. "I guess sometimes we need to be more assertive than we would otherwise want," she says, laughing. With that newfound assertiveness, Ms Bieber organised a visit from her children and grandchildren. The Fitzroy Police Station was called and told people were coming inside her home and why. "I didn't want my family to get fined for something they couldn't afford," she says. "They [the police] didn't quite say, 'Do whatever you like, love' — but that was the sentiment." On a cold day in April, she saw her family again and has been able to see them a few times since. "I just hold them. I just told them I love them," she says. "And I hold my daughter, and we tell stories about our life together and it is a celebration really. "It was like a filling up the soul again." While Kim Bieber can't move much, she says her children do it for her when they visit. "One of my grandchildren does flips and shows me," she says. "One of my grandchildren has just become a Cub, and I talk to her all about those things." "The other is very interested in football. God knows why, really. "They know I'm going to die, and they send me little messages in the morning, like: 'Guess what Grandma? I love you'. "It's sad. There is sadness, but there is a joy. A joy in being able to say goodbye.  "I have been very fortunate." Ms Bieber says there is a lesson for everyone now they have experienced their own lockdown and what it feels like. "We should be more sensitive to what goes on for people who are isolated or unwell, or elderly, or disabled in a way," she says. "That we can be kinder and more compassionate." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. 
