Coronavirus Australia news: 6 million people have now downloaded the COVIDSafe tracing app, restrictions easing further in Victoria and NSW, as it happened
Chief Nursing and Midwifery Officer Alison McMillan says more than 6 million Australians have downloaded the Government's coronavirus contact tracing app. Meanwhile, Victoria and New South Wales are both easing restrictions further, with changes to come into place from next week. Look back on Sunday's events as they unfolded. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery Thanks for following along for another day of COVID-19-related news, everyone.  The live blog will of course be back in the morning. And in the meantime, we'll keep adding the latest to our coronavirus update story overnight, so that's the article to read for the biggest developments as they happen. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery Chief Minister Michael Gunner said the Biosecurity Act — limiting travel to remote communities — would be removed almost two weeks ahead of schedule after consultation with land councils and traditional owners. For the full story, head here. By Yasmin Jeffery Clive Palmer will lodge documents with the High Court this week, arguing Western Australia's border closure is unconstitutional, as the state again recorded no new cases of COVID-19, AAP reports.  Mr Palmer wanted to visit WA for meetings with businesspeople, Senator Mathias Cormann and potential 2021 state election candidates for his United Australia Party, but was rejected due to coronavirus restrictions. "Closing down the border is not only an act of stupidity by WA Premier Mark McGowan, but it is against the Australian constitution and I am confident the High Court will see it that way as well," Mr Palmer said in a statement on Sunday. "The WA premier needs to act now to ensure a successful future beyond COVID-19 by opening his borders to allow trade and travel from Australian states into WA. "It is a matter of national importance that the borders be open." Mr Palmer said he would lodge the legal documents on Monday and hoped to have a directions hearing in the High Court by the end of the week. Mr McGowan said on Friday that he endorsed the WA police commissioner's decision not to grant Mr Palmer an exemption from the travel ban. The premier has continued to insist WA's interstate borders will remain closed for months, despite criticism from some, including NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian.  Audience comment by Agreed I agree with So Sad - where's the petition for journos to at least ask the CMOs how their day is going?  
