NT parks hibernate in coronavirus lockdown as tourists kept out of Australian landmarks
While floating in the middle of a croc-laden river might not be the scenario one associates with care-free serenity, it's bliss for tour guide Dennis Miller. Sitting on his boat in Kakadu's Yellow Water Billabong at sunrise, Dennis is at peace and wondering: could croc country be the safest place in the world right now? "Come to the Northern Territory, it's the safest place on earth, we've got everything for you, and we're just waiting," says Dennis, talking to the ABC from his boat. But while Kakadu National Park remains closed to the public until at least June 18 under coronavirus restrictions, and tourists remain locked out of the Northern Territory under strict border controls, Dennis says the lack of tourism means guides, and even the crocs, are getting lonely. "The crocodiles are smiling, the ducks are whistling, and they're waiting for the tourists to come," he says. "We'd love to have you here in this beautiful spot when it opens." At this time of year in Kakadu's serene wetlands, Dennis says up to seven cruises a day with groups from all over Australia and across the world would usually depart for the famous Yellow Water Cruise. "It's beautiful at all times of the day, but sunrise is special: with the sun coming up behind the escarpment, hitting the water and the colour," Dennis says. "The sunset, too, when you get the reflections on the trees there and the colour really comes out. "In the Northern Territory, the floodplain, the river system, all those ecosystems connected together [you see] on the cruise. It's the only place in the Territory that has all these environments; all the birds and the crocodiles all in one." But with no tourists to entertain, Dennis, one of the most popular guides on Kakadu's waterways, says he remains hard at work in the park. "There's lots to do getting the boats ready and the hotel ready for the tourists when they get here as well," he says. Stephen Mills, the tours manager at Kakadu Tourism, believes Kakadu will remain well-visited by tourists when border restrictions lift in the Territory. "When you have scenery like this, you can understand why the world wants to come to Kakadu," Stephen says. "[It's] one of the richest cultural areas in Australia. 65,000 years the Indigenous people have lived here continuously. "There are hundreds of crocs, millions of birds, wallabies, the fish life is incredible. It truly is one of the wonders of the world." Tess Atie, who runs cultural tours with NT Indigenous Tours at Litchfield National Park south of Darwin, says she is hard at work planning for tourists when the Territory's borders ultimately reopen. But for now, only Northern Territory residents can visit Litchfield — a place Tess grew up hunting for turtles and fishing for barramundi. "My family have lived here all our lives," she says. "We've been living and hunting through this area, coming here for generations. "I love sharing my Aboriginal cultural connection with our visitors when they come from interstate or around the world … I'm very lucky and fortunate to give them that cultural experience here in Litchfield." For tourism operators like Tess who rely on interstate and overseas travel, the current peak season between Easter and September in the NT will yield very little business. "For my businesses, it's had a great impact, it's been very hard … we're waiting for our borders to open. Once the borders open, we'll be ready," she says. "It's been a deep rollercoaster for our businesses … it's been very hard. But there's also a positive: it gives us time to create." While the Northern Territory Chief Minister has given no indication when the NT's borders could reopen, Tess is hopeful tourists from across the country could return in time for the tropical summer in October. "My favourite thing about the tropical summer in the Northern Territory, especially here in Litchfield, is that the spring-fed waterfalls are bursting and there's just so much water," Tess says. "That's when you get the very best of the wet season up here. "My message for all Australians is to come up to the NT [when it opens], because we do have a unique Aboriginal culture up here, we have beautiful waterfalls and a beautiful tropical summer." 
