Coronavirus breach sees NT Police issue warning to venue as owners say rules aren't working
A Darwin pub has been issued a warning by Northern Territory Police for failing to comply with coronavirus regulations on Friday night, while another voluntarily shut its doors after being "overwhelmed" by patrons. The incidents come as one Darwin venue says in-venue coronavirus safety measures are, at times, not working or proving difficult to manage. "The restrictions, I don't know how well thought out they were. We do our best to follow them and we encourage our patrons to follow them," said Matt Mulga, owner of Lola's Pergola in Cullen Bay. "A two-hour restriction, you're encouraging a pub crawl; you're encouraging patrons to go from this bar to that bar to that bar." Mr Mulga said he'd witnessed people leave his venue, go to a nearby restaurant and then come back in half an hour.  "I'm sure we'll look back at [restrictions easing rules] and say they were ill-conceived … and I'm sure the Government will admit that," Mr Mulga said. "If we don't have places like this open, instead we have [house] places where there's no control." Northern Territory pubs, bars and restaurants are open to the public under the proviso customers stay for a maximum of two hours and adhere to physical distancing, a 10-patron table limit is enforced, and that meals are served with alcohol. Morris D'Arrigo, the operations manager at Six Tanks Brew Co in the Darwin CBD, said constantly advising  people to follow the rules when they were drinking was a challenge. "It's a bit of education, coaching, training to let people know this is for their safety," Mr D'Arrigo said. "If it saves my grandmother and my kids, so be it. Let's follow it and I'm sure businesses look at it that way." NT Police Acting Commander Shaun Gill said the warning issued to the Darwin premises on Friday night was "in relation to service of alcohol without meals". Police said the other venue, which closed its doors, was not at fault and did "a very good job" after "a large crowd on very short notice" attended the premises. "The one that was really busy actually had a plan in place … [but] they were unable to deal with the public due to the number of people that arrived", Acting Commander Gill said. "To their credit, they actually closed their doors and no longer served because they couldn't abide by the COVID-19 restrictions." Police said rather than issue the venue with a warning, officers "offered some education" on how it could comply with operating regulations. Despite the two separate instances, Acting Commander Gill said "the public were fairly good and the numbers were fairly low" across the evening in Darwin. "This is just a timely reminder for all involved that the onus is on individuals as well as licensed premises that they have to adhere to restrictions," he said. Police did not disclose the name of either of the venues but said they may be named if problems persisted. No venues have received a fine for breaching coronavirus safety regulations since stage two restriction easing commenced in the Northern Territory on May 15. The fine for breach of coronavirus safety regulations for NT venues is $5,000. Acting Commander Gill said NT Police would continue to take a conciliatory approach with businesses and venues in the early phases of restriction easing before dishing out fines. "We want to give some education to start with and then we want to give [venues] some warning," he said. "To give them an opportunity to comply and then after that, if they continue to fail, then infringement notices will be issued." Police said it was imperative venues and patrons stuck to the 10-person-per-table limit and that 1.5-metre physical distancing was non-negotiable. "People need to be reminded that we're still coming out of a serious event. We're only in the [early] stages of going out of some severe restrictions," Acting Commander Gill said. "The ramifications are that we could end up where we were before." 
