Clear of coronavirus for 40 days, plan to reopen the Kimberley takes shape
When — and how — will it be safe for the Kimberley to reopen? It's a question generating plenty of discussion right across the north of Western Australia at the moment, as statewide restrictions designed to halt the spread of COVID-19 begin to ease. Would-be travellers are keen to head north on what's often an annual migration to escape the winter chill. And cut off from the tourist traffic that can make or break their year, businesses across the Kimberley are keen to get them over the border. But with 17 recorded cases, almost all linked to outside travellers, the prospect of a resumption in visitors also carries a degree of concern within the community. While some politicians and business representatives have urged an immediate reopening, community leaders have set their sights on June 18 for the region's tough travel restrictions to be lifted in a 12-point plan, backed by local government, medical and Aboriginal representatives and submitted to the State Government. With the exception of three cases in Broome, the majority of the Kimberley's 17 COVID-19 cases have been linked to travel — particularly locals and critical workers returning from interstate and overseas. The threat of the virus prompted local leaders to call for a lockdown, resulting in a joint State-Federal biosecurity regime enforcing the toughest travel restrictions in WA. Travellers must quarantine outside the region for 14 days, while travel to (but not from) remote Aboriginal Communities is banned under the threat of fines of up to $50,000 and jail time. But with no new cases for more than 40 days, Kimberley Aboriginal Medical Services (KAMS) CEO Vicki O'Donnell said the argument for restrictions was shifting. "In three weeks' time, you'd have to question why we wouldn't lift border security," Ms O'Donnell said. "We have to think about what's going to happen for the next 12 months — because without a vaccine, we are still a high-risk area." KAMS backed the reopening plan, and argued the Government needed to adequately support Kimberley health services to contain any further outbreaks. Access to rapid, widespread testing across the region would also need to be solidified. Any further lockdowns, Ms O'Donnell said, should be strategic and targeted, with provisions to evacuate at-risk patients. "Maybe locking down a town, as opposed to the whole Kimberley," Ms O'Donnell said. "You can't rule out the prospect of community transmission in Perth, and they're going to be moving around. "We're going to get three times more tourists into the Kimberley than we ever had." An outbreak in a remote community remains a nightmare scenario for the Government, and a key factor in their cautious approach to the Kimberley. Health staff, bolstered by reinforcements from Perth at the height of the outbreak, have used the lull in cases to drill how such an outbreak would be handled. Outbreak management plans, detailing how any further cases would be dealt with community-by-community, are also being worked on. Kimberley Land Council acting chief executive Tyronne Garstone said the restrictions were the right step, but the time was right for them to be lifted. "I think the actions put down by the State Government and the Federal Government were right on the mark," Mr Garstone said. "And that's really played a pivotal role in us being able to keep COVID out of the Kimberley." While some communities had experienced positive results including reduced violence, alcohol and drug abuse, the return of large numbers of current and former residents had also posed significant challenges. Mr Garstone hoped governments would continue to pay close attention to the unique nature of the Kimberley and its remote communities when they began easing restrictions. He said it was imperative communities were given the choice to open back up or remain in lockdown. "They have to understand that each community has their own threshold in regards to removing some of the restrictions," Mr Garstone said. "They'll have to be approached individually and asked, 'Are you comfortable with removal of some of the restrictions?'" While the Government's lack of immediate support left many in the region disappointed, the unified plan may ultimately count in the Kimberley's favour. A unified push from community leaders played a key role in the Government bringing restrictions in and could be a similar factor in them being lifted. "It's always great when you hear a clearly articulated, unified message from the community," Health Minister Roger Cook said. "I'm really quite excited by it and keen to engage." While stopping short of committing to the June 18 date, he said the Government was already working to extricate the region from the "clumsy" Federal biosecurity arrangements that expire on that day. "I think we should, potentially, be more ambitious," Mr Cook said. But he said any shift would still be done on the basis of medical advice, and local medical services being equipped to target and deal with any further outbreak. "Every time we ease a restriction, we increase the risk, so we have to do these things very carefully," Mr Cook said. "But, we do understand there has been a lot of pain in the community." He said some form of restrictions would have to remain in place, due to the Kimberley's vulnerable population, and remote communities would be consulted on how that would look. The prospect of an end to restrictions cannot come soon enough, with a June resumption in tourism allowing a disastrous season to be at least partially salvaged. A survey of local tourism operators released by Australia's North West Tourism this week indicated 26 per cent of respondents were anticipating, or had already recorded, losses of more than $300,000. But chief executive Natasha Mahar said the survey showed persistent interest in bookings for July onwards this year, right into 2021. "They're all wanting to come here and we need to try and let them come here," Ms Mahar said. "We can find a middle ground and make sure we look after our tourism operators and vulnerable communities at the same time." 
