Coronavirus workplace rules create woolly problems for Tasmanian shearers 
New coronavirus workplace rules for shearers have created a backlog of unshorn sheep and could worsen a shortage of shearers in Tasmania. The new COVID-19 shearing operation protocols require shearers and other workers in shearing sheds to keep at least 1.5 metres away from each other as they work. To achieve this, shearing stands have been removed from sheds reducing the number of shearers working in each shed. "We've got a spare stand in between us, we've got to wait for the roustabouts to get the fleece before we walk in and get another sheep, and just make sure we stay away from each other," said veteran shearer Tony Bryant. Shearing contractor Ray Edwards said the number of other workers in each shed had also shrunk. "We normally have a wool presser and another shed hand, we've only got the one shed hand," he said. Sheds have been upgraded to allow for extra hygiene, and shearers are discouraged from travelling together and sharing rooms. Mr Edwards said following the new rules in sheds — often built at the turn of last century — was challenging but necessary for the health of workers. "I've got people that are older, some have got a bit of a heart condition, some have got a bit of asthma, and I've had a few health issues," he said. "I'm just trying to do the right thing by everyone, because I don't want the industry shut down." With fewer shearers working in each shed, fewer sheep can be shorn each day and shearing flocks takes longer. Mr Edwards said that had created a backlog of unshorn sheep as his crews and others spent longer at each property. "Instead of having a job cut out, I've got to wait, so the other farmers got to wait — it's just a snowball effect," he said. When Bothwell wool grower Will Bignell recently had 4,000 lambs shorn, only three shearers worked in the shed instead of the usual four. "It's 25 per cent less sheep, which adds up, it slows our whole system up. We lose efficiencies as well, that's the other thing," he said. Mr Bignell was unsure whether shearers would finish at other properties in time to shear his ewes before they gave birth to lambs in spring. "We'll have to basically look at lambing in wool which is not ideal and not the best animal health outcomes that we can achieve," he said. There was already a shortage of shearers in Tasmania when coronavirus struck. Shearers from the mainland have been deterred from travelling to Tasmania by the mandatory quarantine periods when they enter the state and, in some cases, when they return to the mainland. "If they come over from the mainland they've got to isolate here for 14 days, then when they go back they've got to isolate for 14 days," Mr Edwards said.  "They're going to lose 28 days, Just say they earned $300 a day and work that out. It's a lot of money." He fears the shortage will worsen as the season continues. The coronavirus work rules have also reduced training opportunities for new and aspiring shearers. A novice shearer and wool handler school is held every July at the historic Malahide property in Tasmania's Fingal Valley. Australian Wool Innovation trainer Matthew Haney said while the school usually catered for 20 students, this year the intake had been halved. "The 10 rooms that normally would be shared by two people will only be able to accommodate one student," he said. "Also in the shearing shed the 1.5-metre rule must be adhered to as much as practical, which would be impossible with a large group." The market price for wool has dropped as factories in China and other countries closed and retail customers stopped buying new clothes. Some wool growers are stockpiling fleeces until prices rise again while others are still selling at the reduced price. The coronavirus work restrictions also coincided with the breaking of a years' long drought in key sheep farming. Will Bignell had been forced to hand-feed his flock for two years as little rain fell. "It's taking its toll, your normal coping mechanisms are kind of gone," he said. "I think it's a good thing it rained. If it had been dry and we'd gone into this, it would have been soul-destroying." But he said the industry would overcome the new challenge. "That's typical of agriculture, we're a resilient bunch, we take a knock and we get back up and keep going," he said. 
