Clive Palmer threatens High Court challenge to WA coronavirus border closure after being denied entry
Billionaire mining magnate Clive Palmer has lashed out at Premier Mark McGowan after being refused entry into Western Australia, threatening a High Court challenge to the state's strict state border closure. Mr Palmer said he planned to take the matter to the High Court within days. "We'll be filing papers on Monday and proceeding with a declaration that the lockdown border closure of Western Australia is unconstitutional," he said. "And there's no reason for it at the present time, and that it's just an impediment to the workforce getting back to work and the prosperity of the state." Mr Palmer described the border closure as stupidity on the part of the WA Government. "What [Mr McGowan] is trying to do is against the Australian constitution, and I've got no doubt the High Court will slap him down very quickly," he said. "It's absolute stupidity. What's going to happen in three or four months when our economy is destroyed, people haven't got jobs. "That's not an outcome that we want." He said he would be referencing two sections of the constitution which stated trade and travel between states should be free unless lives were in danger. Mr Palmer also said he did not agree to "totalitarian" conditions which may have allowed him to receive an exemption if he had applied again. "The conditions that they wanted to place on me were that I would tell them where I was going, who I was talking to, and what the subject matter of those conversations was," he said "Which I wasn't prepared to do, that's my private business." The WA Police Force would not confirm if Mr Palmer's application was rejected, saying it would not comment on individual cases. But Premier Mark McGowan said he supported the WA Police Commissioner's decision. "The Police Commissioner makes these decisions based upon the law and the rules we've put in place to protect our citizens," he said. "So, I endorse the Police Commissioner's decision here. He's made it on proper grounds and with the correct purpose behind it. "[He] has clearly said to Mr Palmer that he can't fly in and fly out because he's not one of the exempt people. "The Police Commissioner has made many decisions to keep people out." Mr McGowan said so much work had been done to tackle the virus and he did not want to risk infection coming in from anywhere. "We are trying to keep the health of West Australians safe, and if Mr Palmer doesn't like it … he's subject to the law just like everyone else." WA has closed its borders to the east for the first time in history. Here's how you might be affected. "The medical advice we have is very clear, that our interstate border is important to protect the health of West Australians. He also said he hoped Mr Palmer's case did not have a chance in the High Court. "Well I hope not," he said. "We will fight him in the High Court. "All of our legal advice says that putting in place the rules to protect our state based upon health grounds is justified. "So we've done it for the right reasons to protect the people of Western Australia." 
