JobKeeper numbers cut by 3 million after Federal Government reveals accounting bungle in coronavirus stimulus program
The number of people on JobKeeper has been revised down by 3 million, with Treasury and the Australian Tax Office (ATO) blaming businesses for making "significant errors" in their applications. The estimated cost of the program has been nearly halved from $130 billion to about $70 billion. In a statement, Treasury and the ATO said the mistake came from businesses reporting how much financial assistance they expected to receive, instead of how many employees they thought would be eligible. "For example, over 500 businesses with '1' eligible employee reported a figure of '1,500' (which is the amount of JobKeeper payment they would expect to receive for each fortnight for that employee)," the departments said. ATO Second Commissioner Jeremy Hirschhorn said the error was discovered at the start of this week and the Treasurer was told about the issue on Thursday evening. "With hindsight, perhaps the form could have been more straightforward," he said.  "The question was reasonably clear, it is just unfortunate that 1,000 employers misunderstood it."   Based on the original estimates, Treasury believed the program would subsidise the wages of 6.5 million workers. That has now been revised down to 3.5 million. Federal Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said the error was "good news" and "importantly" the error contained "no consequences for JobKeeper payments that have already been made". "It is welcome news that the impact on the public purse from the program will not be as great as initially estimated," he said. Speaking on Afternoon Briefing, Mr Frydenberg said the Government would not be reallocating the rest of the forecast funding for JobKeeper to other areas, saying it was all "borrowed money" and the error meant less would have to be repaid by future generations. "This is a very uncertain time. I'm not blaming Treasury; I'm not blaming the ATO. No underpayments were made, no overpayments were made." Despite the Treasurer ruling out diverting the unspent money elsewhere, groups including the Council of Small Business, described the error as an opportunity for the Government to expand the scheme. "Migrant workers or people on visas who haven't been eligible so far, there's a lot of them that work for small businesses and I know it's been a concern for a lot of employers out there," Council chief executive officer Peter Strong said. "So, I suggest the Government should have a look at that." Federal Labor leader Anthony Albanese described the bungle as "an absolute shambles". "This is a mistake you could have seen from space," he said. "This is a Government that couldn't run a bath, let alone be good economic managers. "The fact is if you can't get this right, how can you get the economic recovery right?" The JobKeeper scheme is the centrepiece of the Government's coronavirus support package, offering businesses who have experienced a downturn in revenue a wage subsidy for eligible workers. The error was discovered by the ATO and Treasury after they analysed the amounts that were being paid out by the scheme to businesses and comparing them with the estimates of how many employees would be eligible. "It was not picked up by the ATO earlier as their primary focus in the first fortnight of JobKeeper payments was on ensuring that JobKeeper payments were paid promptly to those eligible for them, and not paid to those who were ineligible," the departments said. "These initial estimates from businesses of employees covered are not linked to payments, and so were not as carefully analysed." 
