Violet Town farmers find global success during coronavirus pandemic
An online food network platform developed in Violet Town has taken off across the world as producers look for alternative ways to sell produce. Serenity Hill and Kirsten Larsen, cofounders of the Open Food Network, launched the not-for-profit platform in 2012 after noticing a gap in the market. "We realised supply chains were a critical problem," Ms Larsen said. "There was a disconnect between farmers doing great sustainable farming and the customers that wanted it." Ms Larsen said the platform connected farmers with their communities and put the power of buying and selling back into the hands of the consumer and producer. "We wanted to get more of the retail dollar in farmers pockets and support more sustainable food," she said. The platform acts as a directory where anyone can create a profile and be located through a simple search on a map. Producers can also create their own shop where they can collect payment and sell produce. "It's particularly designed to support the different distribution systems," Ms Larsen said. "Producers can set up a bunch of different shipping methods such as drop-off to people's houses, have a collection point, or pick-up from farms." What started as a grass roots initiative now spans 13 countries, among them Brazil, the Philippines and Italy. Ms Hill said the first global affiliates — and the biggest — were the UK and France. "Canada and the US have also come along and joined the global collective," she said. Subscribe to Rural RoundUp: Stories from the farm. More farmers got on board when the pandemic hit and supply chains began to shut down, along with many farmers' markets, restaurants and cafes. Ms Hill said producers had to start searching for alternative ways to sell their products, leading to a major expansion of the platform. "COVID-19 really was the catalyst," she said. "We had a tenfold increase in people signing up for the platform and a tenfold increase in turn over through the platform." Ms Larsen said it was critical to get the framework right . "It's not about us doing it," she said. "It's about how we create a space so people can see the possibilities and get onboard to make it happen for themselves." 
