China doesn't set GDP target, promises more than $400b to prop up coronavirus-hit economy
China's Government has announced close to $430 billion worth of stimulus funding to help the world's second-largest economy remain stable. The battle against the coronavirus "has not yet come to an end," Premier Li Keqiang warned in a report to the National People's Congress of China. He called on the country to "redouble our efforts" to revive the struggling economy, and said Beijing would skip setting a growth target in order to focus on fighting the disease.  The world's second-largest economy contracted by 6.8 per cent in the three months ending in March after factories, offices, travel and other businesses were shut down to fight the virus.  Mr Li said Beijing would give local governments 2 trillion yuan ($429 billion) to spend on preventing job losses, making sure the public's basic needs were met and helping private companies survive. China, where the pandemic began in December, was the first economy to reopen but is struggling to revive activity.  Private sector analysts say as many as 30 per cent of the country's 442 million urban workers — or as many as 130 million people — lost jobs at least temporarily when the economy shut down to fight the virus, and as many as 25 million jobs might be lost for good this year.  The Government's budget deficit will swell by 1 trillion yuan ($214 billion) this year to help meet targets including creating 9 million new urban jobs, Mr Li said.  "These are extraordinary measures for an unusual time," he said in his nationally televised speech. Read more about coronavirus:A breakdown of which restrictions will be eased across Australia this weekAnatomy of an outbreak: How the Ruby Princess nightmare unfolded Mr Li said the ruling Communist Party would not set a GDP target, usually a closely watched feature of government plans, due to the "great uncertainty" of the epidemic. Factories and shops have reopened but consumer spending, the main engine of economic growth, is weak. Forecasters say China is likely to face a wave of politically volatile job losses later in the year due to weak US and European demand for Chinese exports. Mr Li warned that ensuring economic growth was "of crucial significance" and said pressure on employment had "risen significantly." The announcement comes as trade tensions between China and Australia continue to be strained.  China's top diplomat in Western Australia, Consul General Dong Zhihua, returned to Shanghai this week after the country implemented tariffs on Australian barley.   Australia's barley exports to China were worth $600 million in 2019, and there are fears the new tariffs could decimate the industry. Western Australia will suffer the most, with 88 per cent of Australia's barley exports coming from the state.  ABC/AP 
