What happens behind the scenes producing the ABC Coronavirus Australia live news blog
During a frantic shift curating rapidly unfolding news on the coronavirus crisis, sourcing information for inquiring readers and dishing up some occasional light relief with an amusing GIF, ABC News blogger Sophie Meixner came across a particularly curly question. Barbara wanted to know if she could continue to employ her 'gorgeous pool boy'? "We get a lot of questions asking: 'Can I do [specific activity] in [specific state or territory]' but I wasn't expecting Barbara's particular conundrum," recalls Sophie Meixner. "I saw the comment come in and read it out loud to Simon Smale, who was blogging with me. "We both chuckled, I threw it in the blog along with a couple of lines and didn't think anything of it. "A few people posted the screenshot on Twitter and it escalated from there. "I give all credit to Barbara who asked the most perfect and hilarious question that I only supplemented with my response." While Meixner's deft handling brought some laughs (as well as clarifying whether tradespeople were allowed to visit homes) she and her fellow bloggers take great care to ensure they're striking the right tone, given the devastating scale and impact of COVID-19. "First and foremost, the vast majority of the blog is for posting breaking news and making the current situation clearer for our audience — though we do try to write it in a more conversational and accessible way than some other news stories," Meixner says. "With the more flippant parts of the coronavirus blog, like 'feuds' between bloggers, occasional GIFs, and funny audience questions, I have certainly grappled with making sure I don't ever lose sense of the gravity of the situation and the fact that many people are deeply affected. "That said, the clear majority of our commenters indicate to us that we are striking the right balance between news coverage and the occasional moment of levity, reminding them there can still be humour and silliness in the world." Live blogs are usually launched around big breaking news events to provide rolling coverage of an unfolding story and compliment more traditional news articles, explainers and analysis, but they've also been an important part of ABC News coverage of elections, sport and big entertainment events, such as the Oscars and Eurovision. "Blogging allows us to get the key points to the audience as things happen, in real time," says Simon Smale. "I've been involved in blogging the summer bushfires, Queensland floods and the Christchurch massacre. "It's obvious that those events require a very different style of blogging, where we deliver concise, clear information in a sensitive way. "Meanwhile, when I've been covering Test cricket with the sport team, the coverage tends to be much more frivolous, with GIFS, jokes and a really large amount of audience interaction. "With the coronavirus blog, I've found that the tone that works best is somewhere between the two, a happy medium between delivering the news and keeping things entertaining." The audience interaction in a blog also helps inform how a story or news event is covered. "The added bonus of a live blog is that it gives us an opportunity to see what people are asking about that topic in real time and, particularly during coronavirus, gives us an opportunity to help people find out information," Smale says. "We're able to have those two-way discussions with readers and, to an extent, let them drive the coverage." "Blog readers are necessarily very switched on to the news because they are already across the broad picture and are coming to the blog for minute-by-minute updates," Meixner says. "In that way they often give us insightful and very funny commentary, as well as ask really challenging questions that are well-informed by context and often that nobody else has considered. "So, audience interaction truly enhances the quality of the blog. "There are two moments that stand out to me. "The first was on March 13 when the Government raised the SmartTraveller alert for the whole world to a Level 3 'do not travel'. "The second was on March 29 when Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced the 10-person gathering rule was being cut to a two-person rule. "Both of those moments felt so surreal for me and it was the questions to the blog that made me realise exactly how much each announcement would impact on people's daily lives. "We were able to form a list of common audience questions and seek answers both for blog posts and future stories and in that way, the audience interaction on the blog really shaped our coverage." The coronavirus blog is one of ABC News's longest-running live blogs, clocking up 70 days in a row (at time of writing) since March 14 and sometimes open from 5am to past midnight on a day with lots of developments. There are often two bloggers rostered on at the same time — one focused on breaking news while the other answers audience questions. "It's always a bit of a juggling act with the blog," Meixner says. "If it's a day when the National Cabinet is due to meet we know ahead of time that it's going to be a big one — not only for breaking news, but also in the hours following the press conference when people are going to be looking to the website for an explanation of the announcements made and how they will affect their lives. "But then some days we expect it's going to be quieter and then something huge happens nationally or internationally. "The resources I'm constantly monitoring throughout the shift — aside from questions coming into the blog — are the international and Australian wire services, Twitter and email, the Just In feed on the ABC News website, the ABC News Channel on TV and a service that transcribes it called Tveeder, a constantly updated domestic stats list we use internally, and each state or territory's health website and social media feeds. "From there, information just comes at us and it's our job to present it in a prioritised and coherent way." The bloggers regularly receive more than 300 questions per shift — on the busiest days when wide-ranging restrictions were announced the number topped 1,000 — and do their best to answer as many as possible. "Another funny question I had was a woman who asked whether social distancing restrictions allowed her to still have sex," Meixner says. "I answered it in a way I thought was reasonable and in line with government advice (so far as it had been given). "As a 20-something, I had a lot of friends message me after that post saying they were wondering the exact same thing. "It highlighted how surreal this entire situation is and how many aspects of life have been affected." Meixner said some distressing questions and comments have stayed with her, often from people kept apart from loved ones. "A boyfriend and girlfriend who desperately wanted to see each other but don't live together and decided to stay apart for the noble sake of flattening the curve," she said. "A grandma who is used to seeing her grandkids multiple times a week and now hasn't seen them for more than a month. "A woman struggling with her mental health who's not able to drive interstate to stay with her sister, who wants to care for her." As well as asking questions about the pandemic, the audience has become curious about the bloggers themselves and possible tension in the ranks! "In the early days of this blogging marathon, a few audience members speculated that there might be rivalries on the blog, or a so-called blogging beef," Smale says. "We got so many questions asking why Bridget (Judd) and I didn't get on (we do — I think!) or who each blogger had an issue with. "The great thing about this blog is that there have been about eight different people running it, all with different personalities and styles, which really come out over the course of a seven-and-a-half-hour shift. "I think the audience appreciates that we have different styles — and they clearly have their favourites (Bridget and Sophie being the two people we get asked about a lot). "The interaction we do get with the audience is overwhelmingly positive. "People often just leave a comment saying hi or good morning (or to ask where Sophie or Bridget are) as well as questions about what's going on in the office. "I really enjoy getting comments that I can reply to in a funny way, particularly if people have picked up a thread from a previous day." Some regular commenters even say they don't know where they'll get their fix of drama once the blog stops, and with it the blogging beef. "I hate to spoil people's blogging enjoyment but none of us are feuding with each other and in fact we work in a fairly uneventful, harmonious office," Meixner says. "But on the blog, we have fallen into these fictional alliances which are just too entertaining not to continue. "According to the blog canon, Simon and Bridget are in an active feud, and Peter (Marsh) and I also have beef." And while the audience familiarity has made for engaging and entertaining reading it's been a weird experience for the bloggers. "It's truly odd and often very flattering," Meixner says. "There are people who comment under the name #1 Sophie Fan or Team Sophie. "The blog readers are avid and intelligent news consumers whose insights I really respect. "We online journos definitely aren't like the personalities you sometimes encounter on TV and radio, we're more bookish and less extroverted. "I'm quite happy to go back to being a more-or-less-faceless ABC reporter after this." While the blog style mightn't be everyone's cup of tea, it's attracted a strong audience with more than 42 million page views.  Helping people make sense of a difficult, stressful and uncertain time — and sometimes putting a smile on their face — has been hugely rewarding for the bloggers. "One thing I enjoy most is answering a question for someone who is clearly confused, or just plain concerned about a particular topic, and being able to point them in the direction of an article that one of our journalists has written on that topic," Smale says. "When the person gets back to you and says how helpful that was, that's a good feeling." "Blogging doesn't work for everyone, but it has worked for a lot of people during the coronavirus pandemic," Meixner says. "It certainly doesn't replace the more traditional forms of journalism, which I also love doing, but simply enhances them. "It's a platform we are constantly refining, but I believe it has provided information, clarity and even hope to many Australians as we all go through this surreal event together." Read more stories about how we produce the news on ABC Backstory. 
