Amidst coronavirus chaos, Donald Trump wages war on US Government watchdogs
The US President claims he's been taking a controversial, unproven, potentially dangerous drug in an attempt to ward off the coronavirus. The President threatens to "hold up" federal funding for a state that's suffering a massive flood, all because it sent out applications for mail-in voting to reduce exposure to coronavirus. The President calls a Chinese Government spokesman a "dope" and a "wacko" at a time of near unprecedented tensions between the world's two superpowers. The President's son posts an Instagram meme that suggests Donald Trump's political opponent is a paedophile. A week is a long time for a reporter covering the Trump administration. Distractions and outrage are the only constants, even (or especially) during a pandemic. But here's a thing that may have slipped your attention: Trump has purged five internal watchdogs in the space of six weeks. It's hard to think of a time in living memory when independent oversight was more important for America. Impropriety and incompetence are everywhere you look. The Trump administration and state governors are under intense scrutiny over their failure to act swiftly and effectively during the crucial early stages of the pandemic, which modelling suggests cost at least 36,000 lives. To cope with the economic collapse, the Federal Government has already borrowed $US3 trillion ($4.5 trillion) from the nation's children and grandchildren, with more eye-popping stimulus on the way. And already there have been problems. At least $US1.5 billion, intended to help small businesses struggling with the coronavirus, was snaffled up by publicly listed companies, which were given preferential treatment to apply by banks which collected larger processing fees as a result. And then there's the seizure of Republican Senate intelligence committee chair Richard Burr's phone in an FBI investigation into his dumping of $US1.7 million worth of stocks before the markets tumbled. Fury over a $US700 billion taxpayer bailout for "too-big-to-fail" companies after the 2008 financial crisis, which funded lavish bonuses for bankers and traders, helped spawn the Tea Party movement, which in part led to Trump's election. Who knows where this latest, much bigger, round of murky stimulus will lead in the years to come. Right now, we don't even have a good mechanism for understanding whether fraud is being committed on a grand scale. As part of the latest stimulus legislation, an oversight board was established with broad scope to sniff out "fraud, waste, abuse and mismanagement". Named the Pandemic Response Accountability Committee (PRAC), its membership includes inspectors-general, who were tasked with alerting the public about anything improper in the public health and economic response to the crisis. In the past few weeks, three of the committee's watchdogs have been fired: Mitch Behm from the Transportation Department, Christi Grimm of the Department of Health and Human Services and the Pentagon's Glenn Fine. Behm was investigating a possible conflict of interest; Grimm had reported severe shortages of medical supplies in hospitals; Fine was heading the group overseeing the massive stimulus package. Trump claimed he had to act after receiving "reports of bias". "We have a lot of IGs from the Obama era," he said on Tuesday. Former Justice Department inspector-general Michael Bromwich told Reuters it was akin to "a reign of terror" unleashed on the IG community at a time when they're more needed than ever. "That is bad for everyone, but it's worse for the public," he said. And yet, the sacking of these three inspectors-general are not even the most controversial. State Department inspector-general Steve Linick had been investigating several matters involving the department head, Mike Pompeo. The Secretary of State had been accused of misusing taxpayer-funded staff by directing them to pick up his dry-cleaning and walk the family dog, Sherman. It's a relatively trivial, but potentially embarrassing, allegation. But Linick was also looking into a much more serious matter: whether the Trump administration had unlawfully declared an "emergency" last year that enabled Pompeo to bypass a congressional ban on selling weapons to Saudi Arabia. The declaration was made in the aftermath of the murder of journalist Jamal Khashoggi at a time when Riyadh was dropping American bombs on Yemen, contributing greatly to the world's worst humanitarian crisis. Trump claimed he'd never even heard of the inspector-general. So why did he sack him? "I was asked to by the State Department, by Mike [Pompeo]," he said when pressed this week. The Secretary of State, under investigation on several fronts, simply asked the President to sack the man leading the inquiries and it was done. Pompeo has said he didn't know he was under investigation, claiming Linick had to go because he wasn't "performing a function" that was "additive" to the state department. Others claim it was because of unauthorised disclosures, or leaks. The fact that the fifth sacking, a few weeks ago, surprised no-one, doesn't make it any less disturbing. Michael Atkinson was the intelligence community inspector-general who lit the spark that ended in the President's impeachment and ultimate acquittal in the Senate. Atkinson was just carrying out his duty, as the law required, to report the Ukraine whistleblower complaint to congress. Trump saw it as unacceptable disloyalty. Only one Republican has spoken out strongly against the President's purge. He's the same sole Republican who voted in favour of impeaching Trump. "The firings of multiple inspectors-general is unprecedented; doing so without good cause chills the independence essential to their purpose," wrote senator Mitt Romney on Twitter. "It is a threat to accountable democracy and a fissure in the constitutional balance of power." The President has every right to remove an inspector-general for any reason whatsoever. No doubt, there may be some bias among the crop appointed by Barack Obama. But presidents usually grit their teeth and bear it, in the knowledge that every administration will cop criticism in the name of accountability, with voters making the final call. In 1981, president Ronald Reagan moved to fire IGs installed by his Democratic predecessor Jimmy Carter, but a political uproar forced him to rehire several of them. Obama fired one IG to great bipartisan backlash, and he never tried it again. We're so immune to the constant uproar under Trump, this "scandal" was easy to miss. But it represents yet another brutal assault on the checks and balances that have helped keep the US Government accountable to its employer: the taxpayer. There will be a time when Trump is no longer president. But his legacy is already carved in stone. It'll take a bold, scrupulous and popular president to resist copying the Trump playbook to avoid hard-edged scrutiny. 
