Australia's research ship checking Hobart air quality amid coronavirus shutdown
Tasmanian scientists are collecting data on Hobart's air quality using the CSIRO's research vessel Investigator while the ship is stuck in port due to the coronavirus restrictions. RV Investigator — which has atmospheric instruments to monitor emissions and pollutants — was forced to suspend its operations in March and cancelled five voyages out to sea. CSIRO research scientist Melita Keywood said the instruments were currently running to measure air quality in the Hobart region.  "Wherever the Investigator goes, we can make measurements of the atmosphere, measurements for particles, natural gases and greenhouse gases," she said.  "In Hobart, there are EPA stations that are measuring air quality data to make sure we have good air quality so everyone's health is protected. "There are some gases that we are measuring on the ship that are different from what are usually measured in an air quality station, like carbon dioxide." Ms Keywood said some of the data, such as the presence of gases like ozone, had not been collected in more than 20 years. "That is an air pollutant and is of concern to human health but it's not been measured since the 1990s," she said.  "From the preliminary data, the concentrations are still very low. Particles are bad for human health, but they're not just one thing.  "There are lots of different chemicals and there are lots of different sizes. So we are measuring the size of the particles and the number of small particles." CSIRO technical officer Ian McRobert said having the Investigator docked in Hobart was a unique opportunity.  "The information collected by our instruments tells us about the pollution levels within Hobart and when we're at sea it gives us great background data on global climate," he said.  "We're collecting data on the Hobart air quality throughout the winter and this will contribute to a national study on ultra-fine particle pollution and will also tell us about the profile of pollution created in Hobart during the winter.  Mr McRobert said the pollution within Hobart affected people's health and "there's not great information out there on what those pollution levels are". Science operations manager at the Marine National Facility Matthew Kimber said coronavirus had had a massive impact on the CSIRO and RV Investigator.  "Getting the science party, the researchers from all over the world onto the ship is a really challenging situation with the restrictions in place," he said.  "The other big issue, and as we've seen with cruise ships, is ships in general are really difficult places to manage with the coronavirus. "There's no doubt that we are really going to have to think about how we conduct operations for the foreseeable future." 
