Coronavirus restrictions could mean more risk-taking on our roads, but ACT police warn 'someone's luck will run out'
On Monday, ACT police gave a press conference expressing their frustration at Canberra's recent driving record. There had been a significant spike in road-related incidents, including one in which two drivers were caught travelling at more than 150kph on Parkes Way and another in which a 19-year-old driver wedged their car into a Kambah home at 3:00am. Three major incidents occurred on Sunday and four on Monday in the space of an hour, Officer in Charge of Road Policing, Detective Station Sergeant Marcus Boorman said. Detective Boorman said police had been seeing the rate of driving offences go up with each passing day. "We're catching people speeding, drink driving, drug driving, using their phones, and ignoring red lights on a daily basis, yet every day we're catching more people doing it," he said. He said officers were baffled by the rapid rise, considering there were far fewer drivers on the road than there were before the pandemic brought society to a halt. Detective Boorman said ACT Policing's fear was that the risk-taking behaviour would only get worse, with fines and infringements currently not having their usual effect. "I really don't know where to start in relation to our frustration with what we're seeing out there," he said. "I don't know what's causing this driver behaviour, but I do know what the effect will be, someone's luck will run out and we'll have a person, or people killed." But among psychologists, there are a few reasons that spring to mind to account for the spike in risk-taking, and they are related to the devastating ripple-effect of COVID-19. Each of us has a level of risk with which we are generally comfortable, according to ANU Professor of Psychology Michael Smithson. And when some risk in our life is mitigated, it can be a natural response to then bring in new risks to essentially level things out. That could mean going for an unusually long run and then allowing oneself to eat a special treat later as a kind of reward, effectively levelling out the relationship between risk and safety we are taking with our health. In the case of people speeding or driving under the influence, Dr Smithson said there could be a correlation with the effects of social distancing rules. "They might in a sense feel constrained, or like their freedoms have been denied in one area, so they might be compensating for that," Dr Smithson said. Early data suggesting Australians were drinking more in social isolation also fitted with that idea, he said. "People are maintaining social distancing, staying at home and so on, and when people are behaving in a more morally upright and correct fashion than they're accustomed to, that gives them license to be a little more rotten at something else," Dr Smithson said. "So they'll say, 'maybe I'll have that extra glass of wine, maybe I'll binge watch that series', and that could explain some of that risky driving." ANU College of Law Associate Professor Kath Hall said while it was not possible to know for sure why there had been a spike in driving incidents, risk-taking was often associated with heightened stress in a person's life. She said it was likely the pandemic was taking an enormous toll on people's mental health, not just in terms of uncertainty around work and other significant factors, but also in the way it had confined them. "The more that people's stress levels increase, with thoughts of their health or death, the more prone we are to respond to those stresses with drinking or drug-taking," Dr Hall said. "I think it is interesting that these driving behaviours happened straight after social distancing restrictions." In the ACT, social distancing restrictions eased overnight on Friday, allowing 10 people to dine-in at a cafe or restaurant, while liberties were also extended in relation to public spaces. Saturday night was the first evening people might have felt some license to let loose a little since the pandemic began. "There are a couple of things going on when we have less control over our life, our movements, our decisions, so that where we can, we can try to claim back some control over the things we can do," Dr Hall said. She said the pandemic — bringing with it the threat of thousands of deaths and economic turmoil — could also have altered people's perceptions of what constituted a "serious risk". Speeding or driving under the influence could actually seem like a lesser crime than it would under normal circumstances, she said. In fact, the pandemic's death toll — and subsequent reporting of those statistics — could be having the opposite effect on people than what is intended. Researchers at the University of Stirling recently reported that there was evidence people became more comfortable with taking risks after hearing reports of high numbers of deaths. "The logic is that risk-taking can be a source of self-esteem and one common way of coping with the inescapable threat of death is to bolster our self-esteem," the researchers said. "In short, when you encounter news that hundreds of people, just like your neighbours, have died in the past day, there are consequences for your judgement and decision-making. "You are unlikely to be conscious of some of these consequences and, contrary to what the media and officials would wish, they might make you sensitive to the risks that we now face." But researchers said while people were perhaps having an adverse effect to bad news around the world, stories of heroism had another impact, encouraging people to think more positively. "Heroes typically embody the traits that we would like to see continue into future generations, and so relating thoughts of death to heroism can serve as a buffer against existential concerns," they wrote. The effects of coronavirus are only just starting to be collated and investigated by science, but there is strong evidence to suggest the pandemic is already having significant impacts on our behaviour. Without the luxury of time on their side, ACT Policing could only beg the public to use common sense as coronavirus restrictions ease and society begins to enjoy certain freedoms after months of confinement. 
