Unfair dismissal claims shoot up 70pc amid coronavirus, Fair Work Commission says
Unfair dismissal claims have increased by 70 per cent during the coronavirus crisis, with the Fair Work Commission dealing with an "unprecedented" caseload. The Senate's dedicated COVID-19 inquiry has been grilling public servants in Canberra today, trying to get the latest snapshot of the workforce as the nation continues to grapple with the economic impact of the pandemic. Bernadette O'Neill, general manager of the Fair Work Commission (FWC), said the rate of complaints coming through her agency was "significantly higher than any other period". "Dismissal claims have been reasonably constant over a number of years now," she told the committee. "We have seen a modest increase through the course of this financial year to date. "But what we're seeing at the moment, and the latest figures that I've got, is an increase of more than 70 per cent in unfair dismissal claims. "I think it's fair to say that an explanation clearly is COVID-19." According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, 594,000 Australians lost their job in April as the pandemic squeezed the Australian economy. Given the widespread economic shockwaves caused by the outbreak, and the tough social restrictions which have forced many businesses to close their doors, the FWC believes the figures were not entirely unexpected. "Internal research that we've done, for example, points to a positive correlation between unemployment levels and retrenchment rates and unfair dismissal claims," Ms O'Neill said. Community legal centres had been preparing for an influx in requests for help during the pandemic, expecting an increase in employment and tenancy disputes. A Fair Work Commission spokesperson told the ABC there had been a significant spike in staff and employers contacting the Fair Work Ombudsman about workplace issues arising from the pandemic. During April, more than 75 per cent of COVID-19 calls related to JobKeeper, most of which were from employees. Last month's unemployment figures showed close to 600,000 jobs had been lost since the beginning of the economic downturn. The headline unemployment rate rose to 6.2 per cent, but Treasury Secretary Steven Kennedy told the Senate committee that the real number of people who were out of work was sitting at around 15 per cent. The Commonwealth's JobKeeper wage subsidy program, which came into effect at the beginning of May and is due to operate for six months, has already paid out $8.1 billion to recipients. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. It is estimated the 900,000 businesses that have registered for the JobKeeper program employ more than 6 million staff between them. The Senate committee questioned senior Treasury officials, including secretary Steven Kennedy, about how much Commonwealth support had flowed to Australians doing it tough through the virus-fuelled downturn. More than 1.6 million Australians have made applications to access their superannuation early, and withdrawals have hit $13.2 billion. The Federal Government tweaked the rules for early access to superannuation in cases of financial hardship early on in the coronavirus outbreak. People can access $10,000 this financial year and another $10,000 from July 1. 
