Six dead in Milwaukee shooting as employee opens fire at Molson Coors brewery complex
An employee has opened fire at Milwaukee's Molson Coors brewing complex, killing five fellow workers before taking his own life, police said. The gunman was identified as a 51-year-old Milwaukee man. Police said the bloodshed was confined to the brewing facility, and that "no members of the general public were involved". Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett said it was an "unspeakable tragedy" for the city. "There were five individuals who went to work today, just like everybody goes to work, and they thought they were going to go to work, finish their day and return to their families. They didn't — and tragically they never will," he said. "It is a horrible, horrible day for the employees here. It's a very rough day for anyone who is close to this situation," he added. US President Donald Trump addressed the shooting before speaking at the White House with reporters about steps his administration is taking to combat the coronavirus.  "Our hearts break for them and their loved ones," the President said.  "We send our condolences. We'll be with them, and it's a terrible thing, a terrible thing." Wisconsin Lieutenant Governor Mandela Barnes said it was the scene of "another American tragedy". "A senseless American tragedy, and one that shouldn't have had to happen," Mr Barnes said. Authorities did not immediately release details about the shooter or how the shooting unfolded. Molson Coors CEO Gavin Hattersley called the shooter "an active brewery employee". "Unfortunately, I am devastated to share that we lost five other members of our family in this tragic incident," he said in an email sent to employees. "There are no words to express the deep sadness many of us are feeling right now." "We are all a family. We work a lot of hours together, so we're all very sad," said Selena Curka, a brewery employee who was about to start her shift when the complex went on lockdown and she was turned away. "It's just weird, because nine times out of 10 you're going to know the shooter," said employee Thomas Milner.  "It's a tight-knit family. Within the brewery, we all interact with each other." At least 600 people work at the complex, which is widely known in the Milwaukee area as "Miller Valley", a reference to the Miller Brewing Company that is now part of Molson Coors. A massive red Miller sign towers over the complex and is a well-known symbol in Milwaukee. ABC/Wires 
