Vale the great Australian summer — devastated by bushfires, drought and flooding rain
"In January, days stretch out, with lots to do and find; we feel the sand, we tie the bait, we swim, we play, we stay up late." So mused acclaimed author Jane Godwin in her celebration of the great Australian summer — a narrative intrinsically linked to our national identity. From family camping trips along the coast, to bouts of backyard cricket, our love of summer cuts across all sects of the country, unifying even the most divided amongst us. But this year, for much of the eastern seaboard, languid days basking in the breeze were replaced by anxiety: for our homes and neighbours, for our families and friends, and for a future marred by climate change and the more extreme conditions it has started to bring. Images of sun-drenched families that would once symbolise the holidays were replaced by apocalyptic scenes of children in masks, enveloped by a red and orange hue. Thousands of homes that should have been adorned with Christmas decorations were instead reduced to rubble, and grieving families were left to grapple with the reality that their loved ones would not see the summer's end. As we mark the close of summer and the horror bushfire season — escalated by the outbreak of coronavirus and flooding along the east coast — any residual glow the festive season may have once had is nowhere to be seen. "So many people have come out of this summer probably in a worse sort of condition … because of the disruption and anxiety that came with the bushfires," says University of Tasmania fire ecologist David Bowman. "I think everyone in Australia probably knows someone who was affected. "It's a big event in your life, but now we're moving back to real life, the kids have to go back to school, people have to go back to jobs, and they're beginning to pause and go 'I never had a holiday'." So, is it time to say goodbye to the typical Australian summer for good? It is a question Professor Bowman has been pondering since the nation found itself in the crosshairs of unprecedented climatic conditions, now known as the "Black Summer". This bushfire season was always predicted to be ferocious, but with months of hot weather to go, it has already left a scar on the nation. As we contemplate a future where these kinds of catastrophes become increasingly frequent, he argued in an op-ed for The Conversation, perhaps it's time we rearranged the calendar and reschedule the peak holiday period to March or April. The proposal struck a chord with readers both at home and abroad, Professor Bowman says — something he puts down to its cross-cutting sentiment. "The Prime Minister got caught out on his holiday … [and then there was] the effect on the firefighters who missed out on their holiday and important family time," he says. "Something comparatively simple like rescheduling holidays, in my view, that's a trivial alteration in the adaptive program we're staring down the barrel at." While the economic impacts of the fires are predicted to run into the billions and the impact on tourism and trade has been highly publicised, there are lingering questions around the more intangible impact the lost summer has had on our national wellbeing. Ross Garnaut's climate change prediction is coming true and it's going to cost Australia billions, economists warn. Tony Veal, an adjunct professor at the University of Technology Sydney, likens it to the Cold War. "At one time, people were worried about whether we were going to be blown up by nuclear war, people can get very stressed about those things, as many people are by climate change," he says. "And if it's on your doorstep with fires and floods, it becomes even more stressful. Obviously, the people directly involved with it are stressed, but it can have an impact on the community at large." Professor Veal, who specialises in the role of leisure in work and planning policy, doesn't mince words: "In a very basic sense, if you don't have any time off, it'll kill you". But with nearly 80 per cent of Australians affected by the summer crisis in some way, the idea of a holiday might seem like a foreign concept for many — from those on the frontline working tirelessly trying to reckon with the ruins and communities living under the shadows of tragedy, to tourists who found themselves stranded in the fire zones and those forced to reschedule their summer break. "Now we have this coronavirus issue, so all those things contribute to stress," he says. "Whether you sit and chat with your friends or family, or play with your kids, or whether you go to the pub and have a drink, you need time to do it. "In times of stress, whatever the source of the stress, one needs that outlet. If you don't have those opportunities to take a break, there are consequences." The link between trauma born out of natural disasters and its impact on productivity and wellbeing has been well documented, both anecdotally and in scientific literature. But with millions of hectares burnt, wildlife decimated and the devastation firmly etched into the national consciousness, psychiatrists fear the secondary effects could be more widespread than many first thought. They are the heart-stopping videos that stopped the nation and stunned the world. But who filmed them and how did their stories end? "You might find that a person will be safe in their house, but they're worried about their friends out in the fire truck," says associate professor John Allan, president of the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists. "The blanket coverage we've had on television … I think people really saw this as a watershed moment for the country. "There's a secondary effect on many, many people through relationships and love — love for their country and love for their community — [and so] a very broad range of people are affected." As the weeks and months pass, and the nation irrevocably turns its attention elsewhere, the residual impact will continue to be felt by those communities on the frontline of the disaster. But while many will recover, for others, the trauma of our lost summer will remain for years to come. "You have the event, and all the support rushes in, there's all this wonderful stuff, and then the support is withdrawn," Professor Allan says. "There are people where that trauma lingers, and that becomes manifest over the next year or two, so starting about now. "This is the time we really need to make sure everyone has recovered, and those that haven't, really need that support." 
