Complex coronavirus travel refund process leaves couple $20,000 out of pocket
A Melbourne couple has been left $20,000 out of pocket after their South African odyssey was cancelled because of coronavirus restrictions. Key points:Thousands of traveller are complaining about being refused refunds in social media support groupsOne industry expert says the refund process is complex, with multiple providers often involvedThe ACCC says consumer guarantees are unlikely to apply where travel is shut down by governmentBrigid and Don Burnard booked a $33,798 package holiday with Imagine Cruising which included a luxury cruise, rail adventure and safari. The company agreed to refund a third of the payment, but $20,246 remains outstanding, offered as a travel credit for the same itinerary in the future. Ms Burnard said due to her husband's ill health, and the fact it could be years before they can safely travel again due to coronavirus, a credit was "out of the question". "He turns 89 in August. It is impossible to even fathom him planning to go on any long trip," she said. The Burnards are not alone in their frustration, with thousands of consumers joining social media support groups after having their request for refunds refused. Facebook groups like Flight Centre Class Action Australia, Luxury Escaped Us and MSC Cancelled Cruise Group for Australians reveal the frustration of customers left out of pocket. Managing director of the Council of Australian Tour Operators Brett Jardine said travel companies were doing it tough and it would be a "far better outcome for all concerned" if customers agreed to postpone their trip, instead of cancelling. Mr Jardine said the refund process was not always straightforward, due to the complex nature of travel-provider networks. "Within that supply chain, there are travel agents, tour operators, wholesalers, destination management companies," Mr Jardine said. "The money can be caught up anywhere within that ecosystem, and there are binding agreements within each of those layers."An advertisement for a luxury African holiday torn out of a newspaper. An advertisement for the Imagine Cruising holiday that was meant to depart in March.(ABC News: Alison Xiao)The Australian Consumer Competition Commission (ACCC) said a consumer's right to a refund was governed by individual terms and conditions. "Where travel has been shut down by government action, the consumer guarantees are unlikely to apply," it said in a statement. Ms Burnard said chasing up the company had been stressful and confusing. "It seems to be that it's deliberately made difficult, so they don't have to give you answers," she said. "You think 'what can I do next?'. And there doesn't seem to be anywhere else to turn."Travellers who may be experiencing similar issues to the Burnards can find advice through Choice, the ACCC and state consumer protection bodies. Law firm Slater and Gordon are also investigating a class action against major travel providers. The Burnards said they would keep fighting, even though the process had been tiring and painful. "It's just been a drawn-out saga … it just gets us down," Ms Burnard said. Imagine Cruising has been contacted for comment. After this story was published, the company told the ABC the couple would get a full refund "in due course". The company said is was doing its "very best" to find favourable options for their customers, but that confirming refund details with suppliers was "proving to be challenging and time consuming".
