Nurses praised for rapidly upskilling amid coronavirus threat
Wollongong registered nurse Carmen Wood is among many across the nation who have volunteered to rapidly upskill as part of preparations and response to the coronavirus threat. Key points:Nurses from different departments in hospitals are volunteering to upskill to intensive care to help in the COVID-19 crisisSenior colleagues have praised the nurses for their response and speed at upskillingThe rapid upskill is providing hospitals with greater capacity for any potential second waveMs Wood worked in intensive care almost a decade ago and said when the call went out for more staff to return to ICU she wanted to help her colleagues. "Physical risks didn't actually cross my mind, I have been working as a nurse for 12 years and never in my career did I feel at risk," she said. But it took a week for her to weigh up the potential emotional impact. "Some of my deep concerns were what I was seeing overseas — images and stories of staff in Italy, the UK and Spain," she said. "I was also trying to prepare myself for the worst, that meant potentially having patients pass away in our unit without any of their family beside them."Rapid upskillMs Wood said she was impressed by the speedy creation of education resources and enjoyed working with a buddy for on-the-job training. "Getting my head around the electronic medical records system 'eRIC' has been one that has taken me a bit of time, and getting my head around the medications that we give in intensive care," she said. "You'll find that a lot of the medication in intensive care aren't given in any other ward in the hospital, so there is a lot more complexity there."Fast response praisedA surgeon, wearing scrubs, stands outside a regional hospital"They are putting themselves in uncomfortable situations, and to be honest what we are doing anyway is an uncomfortable situation around the pandemic, so they have said as if that isn't enough we are going to retrain as well," Dr Ashford said. "Suddenly they not only have to understand the complex machinery, but complex patients, and that is a pretty big challenge."The hospital's director of nursing and midwifery, Kathleen Thorpe, said she was incredibly proud of her team. "Not one minute has been wasted, everything is about preparedness and planning, and not just for next week, but for the many months ahead that this could take," Ms Thorpe said. "As for the bravery, I remember one of the first days telling staff we were changing the patient acuity they have and there were two new graduates who put up their hands and said 'This is what I have been waiting for'. It does give you goosebumps."Creating capacity for possible second waveWhile local staff had not faced the surge of COVID-19 cases as experienced in some countries, Dr Ashford knew there could still be a challenge ahead. "A lot of people who put their hand up originally thought they were putting their hand up to go into a storm, but it's ended up being a calm day, so that is making the decision more difficult for people who are thinking, why did I bother doing this?""But this gives us a capacity that would not be possible without them putting their hands up."With International Nurses Day last week, Ms Wood said she was incredibly proud of what she and her colleagues had achieved in such a short space of time. "Coming together and delivering the best care they can in a such a stressful time," she said.
