Coronavirus put the brakes on the Gold Coast's super-fast growth, so what's next?
Some people believe coronavirus has given the Gold Coast time to slow down and reconsider the pace of development, while others say more construction is needed to kickstart the local economy. Key points:The Gold Coast expected to grow by 350,000, bringing its population to about 1 million by 2041The construction sector has warned building approvals could drop by 45 per cent due to coronavirusA developer says the industry is key to economic revival but a community group has called for a rethinkThe comments come as the city's population growth faces hiccups and the construction industry warns of a massive downturn. The President of Community Alliance Association, John Hicks, has been a vocal opponent of what he says are "excessive relaxations" of the council's City Plan — a guideline for the scope and scale of developments. "It will be a useful breathing space to have that conversation with the wider community without hectic pressures from very fast-paced development," he said. "We should use that time wisely to have a good think about the sort of city we are building."But with the construction sector employing up to 10 per cent of the Gold Coast's workforce, one developer has called for "more of the same" to help the city's economic recovery. 'Couple of bridges' to crossMaster Builders Queensland has warned the number of building approvals in the region could drop by 45 per cent. Developer Greg Rix said maintaining the Gold Coast's strong population growth was vital but there were "a couple of bridges" to cross first, including restrictions on international travel. "We're getting between 12,000 to 15,000 new people moving to the Gold Coast per annum, quite a large number of those are overseas investors," he said. "Interstate people migrating to the Gold Coast, financially, do they still have the ability to move to an area like our own?"If you don't have buyers, it's no good building projects."Mr Rix said a number of projects had been put on hold as the industry came to terms with the economic fallout of coronavirus. "The uncertainty will be the migration of people continuing to come to the Gold Coast," he said. "We have relied on overseas markets, that is a given, whether that overseas market returns at the same level or how long it takes to return, will affect the rollout of development on the Gold Coast."'Balance is tipped in favour' of developersMr Hicks said it was "business as usual" at Gold Coast City Council, despite four new councillors being elected in March. "We think it's business that's leading us down to city development more akin to Gotham City by the sea than a world-class sub-tropical leafy city". "Things need to be improved," he said. Mr Hicks said height and density limits in the City Plan had been relaxed too often, resulting in "overscale buildings with a very poor resident experience in adjacent properties". "The balance is tipped in favour strongly of the developer and we acknowledge that balance needs to be returned to a better place where the interests of the community and the developer are better balanced."A spokesperson for the City of Gold Coast said "it would not be considered appropriate for Council to hold regular town hall meetings in relation to developments". "Public notification requirements are stipulated within the State’s Planning Act. Town Hall meetings would not be appropriate in the context of statutory timeframes that are also mandated by the Planning Act."Development a 'backbone' of the Gold Coast's economyMr Rix said development had been "one of the backbones of the Gold Coast economy" but there would be "repercussions on settlement into our community which of course affects development and construction". "You won't see overseas travel into Australia probably till next year so that means that even when we're fired up in the economy we won't have those overseas investments," he said. "There may well be projects that were earmarked for construction this year delayed."But he said "post the virus, you're going to need employment" and that development meant more "people spending money at shopping centres, at schools". "The positive side is that the Gold Coast is still the premiere place to live in Australia and I believe we will see development continue to go forward."Mr Hicks said he was yet to see any significant drop on development proposals but that projects which fall outside of the City Plan should be rejected. "We're yet see the cranes disappear from the horizon. "We know we have to grow, that's acknowledged, but we just have to do it well," he said.
