Coronavirus shutdowns have exposed Australia's manufacturing gaps, Industry Minister Karen Andrews says
The coronavirus pandemic has exposed gaps in Australia's manufacturing capability however "complete self-sufficiency" should not be Australia's goal, according to the Federal Industry Minister. Key points:Global supply chains have been disrupted by coronavirus shutdowns in other countriesLocal manufacturers have ramped up production of key health and food supplies during the pandemicKaren Andrews says there is a groundswell of support for Australian-made productsIn a speech to the National Press Club today, Karen Andrews is expected to say there was a "a lot of scepticism" that local manufacturers could quickly ramp up demand for personal protective equipment like face masks, ventilators and hand sanitiser in response to COVID-19. "When we first began preparing for this crisis I was told that Australia would not be able to make more than about 37 million surgical masks a year – we're now expecting to produce more than 200 million this year," she is expected to say. "I refused to accept the advice that Australian manufacturers would only be able to fill small gaps in supply. "Capability exists in this country. What was needed was a change in the culture of how we think about our capability, about how we challenge the status quo."The pandemic has brought Australia's reliance on other countries into sharp focus, with Ms Andrews saying disruptions to global supply chains were a wake up call for many businesses. However, she argued the future of local manufacturing was not about "re-living a golden era". "While COVID-19 has brought issues such as sovereign capability to the forefront and, frankly, exposed gaps in our manufacturing, I am not suggesting that complete self-sufficiency should be our goal," she said. "There are many things Australia won't and shouldn't be making, but it is clear we cannot just rely on foreign supply chains for the essential items we need in a crisis. "We can't supply all our wants locally, but we have to be able to supply, or at least pivot our production processes to produce the goods we need. "And we need to compete on value, not on cost."The Minister said manufacturing had faced its own "existential challenges" over many decades and that while the decline of Australia's car industry attracted a lot of attention, other sectors such as food and beverage production were growing even before the pandemic. In her speech, Ms Andrews is expected to argue that cutting red tape across all levels of government was the most significant change that could be made without drawing on taxpayer funding, saying the crisis had shown changes that would normally take years could be made within weeks if necessary. "[Industry group] Manufacturing Australia cite the fact that a factory can be proposed, approved, built and operational in America in less time than it takes to jump the very first approval hurdle in Australia," she will tell the Press Club. "That's simply not good enough."She also is expected to say there is a "groundswell" of support from Australian consumers who will continue to demand more locally-produced products as the nation emerged from the crisis. "There's a real sense that in a post-COVID world, where norms have indeed been disrupted, there will be an adjustment of our fast, disposable, retail approach," she said. "A return to quality over quantity."
