Australia-China trade stoush over coronavirus inquiry puts exports — and more —at risk
Exports from four major beef facilities have been suspended, barley has been threatened with tariffs of 80 per cent and wine producers are worried they will not be able to sell their top drops. China's apparent displeasure at Prime Minister Scott Morrison's calls for an inquiry into the origin of COVID-19 is ramping up and it's feared many more industries could be at risk, adding to the pressure from the coronavirus economic slowdown. Here is a rundown of what's happening in China-Australia trade relations. China is by far Australia's biggest export market, taking about 30 per cent of Australia's exports by value. According to recent Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade figures, China takes $79.5 billion worth of Australian iron ore, $13.8 billion worth of coal and $16 billion in natural gas exports. In 2017-18 Australia exported $123.3 billion in goods and services to China, equal to about 6.7 per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The Chinese steel mills are engineered to take particular blends of ore that Australia supplies making it unlikely China would shift away to other suppliers, but the flow of Chinese students and tourists to our shores is under threat, as are exports of primary produce and consumer goods. There are over 12,000 Australian exporters selling goods to China either directly or via Hong Kong and over 3,000 Australian businesses based there. Australia's top trading partners: China also imports $2.67 billion in Australian beef, just slightly more than Japan. In fact, Japan does pip China for the slice of our resources in the coal and natural gas sectors as well, but again, not by a huge margin. Coal is the biggest where Japan's $17.05 billion of Australian coal imports is $3 billion more than China's. But both countries are way ahead of the next market, India, at just $10.61 billion. Australia's top goods exports: Biggest trading partners by top export: Iron ore Coal Natural gas Gold Beef Any sanctions or tariff hikes on Australian products will likely hit our grain, wine, dairy and seafood sectors which rely heavily on China as well. Chinese authorities have so far ignored attempts by the Morrison Government to reach out and discuss trade tensions. Trade Minister Simon Birmingham confirmed his Chinese counterpart Zhong Shan had not responded to his requests for a meeting. Prime Minister Scott Morrison described the current situation as "obviously a difficult time". He also said Australia "will always do the right thing when it comes to respecting other countries' laws". "We always respect the sovereignty of other nations and we simply expect the same in return and I think that’s a pretty fair deal," he said. Although Australia would suffer some pretty severe economic fallout if China pulled the plug, UNSW Business School economics fellow and lecturer Tim Harcourt reckons our strong relationship with other Asian countries will see us through. "We're not alone. Most countries have been engaging heavily with China because it's the story of the Asian century, over 10 per cent growth [per annum] over 20 years, why wouldn't you?" Mr Harcourt said. "The difficulty with China you get a mix of geopolitics with commercial decisions. "With barley, Australia provides a fifth of China's barley … Any dispute around that has probably been around for about 18 months and China has chosen the corona spat to go in hard. "This talk of barley and beef, it's really just going to hurt China. "China has got great issues with energy security and food security. China would be aware Australia can shift over to Japan and South Korea pretty quickly. "China has got a billion people that need energy, food, quality education for their children." It might seem like the PM's enthusiasm for an inquiry into the origin of coronavirus — widely believed to be in the Chinese city of Wuhan — has prompted this retaliation, but this has all happened before. In any case, Mr Morrison is not giving up, saying Australia would always "stand our ground when it comes to the things we believe in" and "reach out to the rest of the world and seek to deal with it fairly, honestly and openly". UNSW Law's China International Business and Economic Law Centre co-director Professor Heng Wang said countries like Korea, Japan, Norway and Canada have all copped some kind of animosity from China. And France has been on the receiving end, too, of late. "It's not uncommon and the solution almost always depends on time and the relationship between the countries, and in most cases, it's hard to address in a short time," he said. "A more constructive way is to use the RCEP — Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership — the only one China is involved in. It's a regional free trade agreement among 16 countries that will deliver substantial new trade and investment opportunities for Australia in the Indo-Pacific region. "[These sorts of trade stoushes are] increasingly common if you don't have a trade-based agreement." China's Ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingyer described Mr Morrison's global coronavirus inquiry as "dangerous" and undermining of the global fight against the pandemic. He warned Chinese people might have second thoughts about trips to Australia and parents might not want to send their children to a hostile country. After banning imports from four Australian abattoirs, Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said China Customs detected repeated violations of inspection and quarantine requirements agreed by Chinese and Australian authorities. "To safeguard Chinese consumers' health and safety, China has decided to suspend effectively immediately, processing four Australian companies' import declarations for meat products," he said. "The relevant Australian department has been informed of this decision. "The Chinese side has asked the Australian side to conduct a thorough investigation to find the cause and address the issue. You may get more specifics from the competent Chinese authorities." All this sparks the question of why we are so concerned about one country refusing our produce. Mr Harcourt said there is a bit more work to do in diversification of our export markets, but it's not all doom and gloom, and we haven't put all our beef and barley into one paddock. "We have developed reasonable alternative markets — we have reasonable trade with South Korea, we're best of mates with Japan," he said. "For Australia it's been the engagement with Asia, not just China — the power of proximity, not the tyranny of distance. "I think there's a bit of diplomacy to do and a bit of diversification. [Trade Minister] Simon Birmingham is a level-headed smart guy and he will work through the usual channels commercially. "The beef industry will start again. There's some technical issues they'll get over. The beef producers have been quite measured. The average Chinese consumer loves Aussie beef, so do the Japanese and the Koreans. It's a quality product. "And, when you think about the nuts and blots of this, I would have thought the beneficiaries of a call for an inquiry into how a pandemic started would be the Chinese people, given how many people were harmed in Wuhan." 
