Country postie delivers smile and some love to Tasmania's coronavirus hotspot
On her country mail run Jocelyn Flint delivers letters, boxes of wine, flat pack queen-size beds, asthma puffers, and even biscuits for morning tea. With about 5,000 people in quarantine in Tasmania's North West, there's a strict stay-at-home order for everyone in the region and Ms Flint is a welcome sight as she does her rounds. "I've been getting quite a few thankyous the past couple of days," Ms Flint said. Cheryl Willie lives with her husband on the Redpa dairy farm run by her son, Rohan. They've got 300 Friesian cows on prime, lush green dairying country. She loves catching up with Ms Flint, especially at the moment. "We couldn't do without her … because she's the only person we're seeing in isolation," Ms Willie said. Ms Willie is one of about 300 farms and households on Ms Flint's postal route on the north-west tip of Tasmania. "It's always good to see the mail lady, as we call her," Mr Willie said. Even more so now that the north west of Tasmania is in lockdown due to a COVID-19 outbreak. "A lot of people rely on her pretty much," Mr Willie said. Ms Flint is delivering all kinds of things and often a bit extra. "I'm doing a lot more deliveries at the moment, people aren't leaving home and they're ringing me and I'm picking up stuff for them," she said. Nothing is too big or too small for this country postie, but sometimes it is a squeeze getting stuff into the back of her small four-wheel drive. Yesterday it was a flat pack queen-size bed, the other day a flat screen tv, some medication for cows, and an asthma puffer. Since the coronavirus outbreak, it is taking her longer to do the run — but it's not just because of the increase in parcels. "I'm always having a yack, got to catch up, and I'm full of news. I can tell them what's going on around the place. I know everything," Ms Flint said. It's pretty social and she gets plenty of laughs along the way. Farmers in this country put a bit of effort into the designs of their letterboxes. One farmer on the route built a letterbox in the shape of an army tank. Often this postie will go to extra lengths to deliver to her clients, dropping things off at the door rather than the roadside post box. Sometimes the requests are a bit cheeky, like the one for a packet of biscuits for a famer's morning tea. "When I got to the mailbox, there was an envelope in there and there were cow muck fingerprints all over it and a lot of five-cent coins," Ms Flint said. In her spare time, Ms Flint is a horsewoman. She's part of a posse of local stockmen and women who volunteer to move cattle from Robbins Island to mainland Tasmania. It's an 11-kilometre route that she knows well and it sees the cattle and drovers winding their way between pooling seawater and a rushing incoming tide. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "You never get over the scenery, it's beautiful. It's just so different every time," she said. A knee operation forced her out of the saddle recently and she missed the last muster. "I'll be on the horse soon," she said. In the meantime this stockwoman and country postie is playing a big part in keeping North West Tassie people happy in trying times. 
