Eco-friendly coffins on the rise as Australians look to reduce their environmental footprint
Jan Abel and her partner Murray were among a dozen people who signed up to an eco coffin-making workshop with the hope of reducing their environmental footprint — in both life and death. At the first session, the couple — from Gawler, South Australia — began creating shrouds using natural fibres and designing flat-pack coffins. Murray's sketch featured a vibrant symmetrical motif incorporating his life's many passions. "I'm not ready to go yet so, say in ten or 15 years' time, what's your role?" he asked doula Helen Roberts, who he wanted to help with his end-of-life planning. "I hope in 20 years' time I'll still be there [to help]," she replied. "I don't want to die tomorrow, but I might." Just days after their conversation, Murray had a heart attack and died. "He was a lovely person. We had so much fun," Ms Abel said.  "The day before he died, we were so lucky to be put into [coronavirus isolation] with all the things that we could share together, with art and music and all those sorts of things. "But sadly, by the next morning, he was gone." Murray's family and friends worked together to plan his farewell and decorate a flat-pack coffin. Ms Abel said she wouldn't have known what he wanted unless they had discussed it at the workshop. "I was able to transfer what he wanted onto the coffin and complete it as he wanted to the best of my ability," she said. "It's just been made beautiful because of this project. It would have been so much harder to deal with if I hadn't been able to participate and do his coffin." Organiser Abby Buckley said Murray's death made the eco coffin project more poignant. "We all got to use our skills and think about how to apply our skills sooner than we were planning," she said. "We had this lovely moment where we could come together in COVID-19 restrictions and work with Jan." The program was quickly booked out when it launched in October and has since moved online due to social gathering restrictions. "It's actually worked to our advantage — having the pandemic and people being able to be in their own cocoon and own space to really think about what death is for them and how they want to their body to be treated when they die." Participants have shared their creations — made by crocheting, sewing, felting and painting — and received online talks from experts about dying sustainably. "In Australia, the majority of people are really trying hard to change their ways to live a sustainable life," Ms Buckley said. "We're trying to move from a fossil fuel economy to a renewable economy … And yet, it's like all that thinking goes out the window when we die." "We're learning a dialogue, we're becoming more informed so that when we are working with the professionals in this industry, it's easier for them because they can have a more empowered conversation." Since 2008, more than 170 people have chosen a natural burial at Wirra Wonga in Adelaide's northern suburbs. The area hugs the perimeter of the Enfield Memorial Park and mirrors the native vegetation of adjacent Folland Park Reserve. It was the first dedicated site in Australia where bodies could be naturally buried in biodegradable coffins or wrappings. Graves are marked with trees instead of headstones. "I think for people who are passionate about sustainability, have a lot of values about conservation, this is an appealing process and appealing way to say farewell to the planet," Adelaide Cemeteries Authority chief executive Robert Pitt said. He said natural burials provided consumer choice but also made good business sense. "It's very low-maintenance. It very quickly and very sustainably provides some greenness and better aesthetics to a cemetery," Mr Pitt said. "I'd like to be able to come back in 100 years and see it — my vision is the natural burial ground would have extended … there'll be native trees and scrubs here." Mr Pitt said his sustainability plans extended across all aspects of the business, including the installation of new cremators to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and seeking higher environmental management accreditation. "I'd also love to get rid of any bits of plastic and wire in floral tributes … they're absolutely glorious but we do have some troubles recycling those," he said. "We just think it's the right thing to do and it's also sustainable … there are a lot of reasons why we would do it, in fact, there are very few reasons why we wouldn't." 
