Former PNG prime minister Peter O'Neill charged with misappropriation, corruption and abuse of office
Former Papua New Guinea prime minister Peter O'Neill has been charged with misappropriation, official corruption and abuse of office. Mr O'Neill was arrested by police at Jackson's International Airport in Port Moresby on Saturday afternoon after flying back from Brisbane where he had been stranded because of COVID-19 lockdowns. Police say the investigation surrounds the purchase of two generators from Israel for 50 million kina ($21.8 million) when Mr O'Neill was leading the country. In a statement, Assistant Commissioner of Crimes Hodges Ette alleged Mr O'Neill directed payments for the purchase of the generators without due consideration for procurement processes, without approval of parliament and without a tender process. "Mr O'Neill directed the National Executive Council to convene and approved the payment of K50 million for the generators after the purchase was made," he said. Mr O'Neill has described the case as "highly politicised" and defended the handling of the purchase. "I look forward to having my day in court soon so that the truth can prevail and this injustice corrected and exposed," he said in a statement. Mr O'Neill also questioned why current Prime Minister James Marape, who was finance minister at the time, was not being investigated. On Facebook, Mr Marape said "the work of police would not be impeded by myself as Prime Minister". He urged people to respect Mr O'Neill and the legal process. Mr O'Neill led Papua New Guinea for seven years, before quitting in 2019 after a string of high-profile resignations from his government.  Police attempted to arrest Mr O'Neill in October last year over a different issue.  He denied any wrongdoing and said it was a "political witch hunt". Police withdrew that warrant after Mr O'Neill challenged its validity in court. Police said the former prime minister will be allowed bail and will be expected to be quarantined at his own residence for the next 14 days after being interviewed, in line with current COVID-19 regulations. 
