Coronavirus vaccine lessons learnt from swine flu, as pharmaceutical giants look for COVID-19 solution
For Russell Basser, the pressure was immense. It was 2009. Swine flu had arrived — the last global pandemic before coronavirus. Though it was far removed from the devastating impact of COVID-19 — there were no lockdowns and life in Australia remained relatively normal — the virus was killing people. Healthy young people. Like today, the race was on to find a vaccine. And Dr Basser — a top executive at research firm CSL's clinical and regulatory arm — was in charge of finding it. "It [swine flu] was actually hitting kids and pregnant women," Dr Basser said. "We were worried this was going to be something akin to the Spanish flu. "We were racing. We put our full body and soul commitment into getting that vaccine developed. "And there was pressure, as there is now."The pressure is real. Across the world, more than 115 coronavirus vaccines are in development. Eight human trials are underway — five in China. It is a global race between nations and the subject of US espionage claims against China. Billions are being poured into development, with big pharmaceutical companies teaming up to speed up the process. But the prize — if it comes — will become a powerful political tool, potentially freeing the citizens of the country that produces it from the shackles of life with coronavirus. And though the stakes may not have been as high in 2009, lessons have been learnt to help with the response today. Two people in PPE protective gear, and a person holding up a passport. This facility in Wuhan, China has started phase two human clinical trials of a coronavirus vaccine(AAP)CSL, today the most valuable company in the country, is Australia's biosecurity partner and manufacturer of the seasonal flu jab. As it is focused on influenza vaccines, it is not actively involved in the search for a coronavirus vaccine, apart from supporting others in their efforts, like the University of Queensland. But back in 2009, it was at the forefront. And it achieved its goal. Dr Basser's Australian-based team was the first to carry out human trials of a swine flu vaccine. CSL then received approval in September 2009 with the Australian government kicking off its immunisation program the same month. A Chinese firm working on similar timeframes kicked off its program days later. "It was a bit of a relief more than anything," Dr Basser told the ABC. "A relief that we could develop a vaccine with the volumes required for the Australian population, much more efficiently and much quicker than we might have been able to. "We were very efficient in what we did."But what happened next is the issue that has some in the global health community worried. By the end of 2009, about 37,000 Australians were diagnosed with swine flu and 190 people died. Yet Australia came out of the swine flu pandemic relatively unscathed because of CSL's swift response. CSL had agreements with a number of countries: Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, the US and Canada to hand over the vaccine, in turn producing a healthy windfall for the company. Yet, the governments of those countries determined how it got used. These countries entered into contracts with big pharmaceutical companies, effectively monopolising the H1N1 swine flu vaccine at the expense of poorer nations, who were pushed to the back of the queue. Looking back, Dr Basser said the mistakes made more a decade ago were informing today's decisions. "As a global ecosystem of vaccine developers, not only do we need to look out for our own communities, but we also do need to look after the rest of the world," he said. "And one of the big learnings from swine flu was that the system and network wasn't as well set up as what it could have been. "The world's had a wake-up call."Evening out the playing fieldTony Cunningham, an adviser to the Federal Government on Australia's coronavirus vaccine response, consulted with CSL and the global vaccine company that distributed it across the world back in 2009. The founding director of the Westmead Institute for Medical Research's virus research centre said the fact that countries would "often look after their own populations first" was relevant to COVID-19 response and that issue remains a "major concern" for the World Health Organization. But since the swine flu experience, there has been a global push to level the playing field. The Switzerland-based Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), founded in 2016 by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, was established to coordinate the development of new vaccines to prevent and contain infectious disease epidemics. It is in the midst of negotiations with a range of companies, research arms and state-backed organisations for a coronavirus vaccine. Last week it granted American vaccine development company Novavax US$384 million ($599 million) for its push to find a coronavirus vaccine — CEPI's biggest-ever funding boost. Will history repeat?There are still concerns if a vaccine is successful, what happened in 2009 could happen again. The concerns are centred on countries such as the US — a leader in pharmaceutical research — being hit so hard by coronavirus that if one is produced in-country it will not be shared worldwide for months or even years. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. The ABC understands CEPI's negotiations with companies in the US and the Trump administration have been sensitive, with work still to be done in locking down agreements. The concerns have also spread to China. Although some commentators suggest China is keen to use the development of a vaccine to reboot its global standing on the back of coronavirus, others fear a state-backed firm may not be as generous with its intellectual property. Professor Cunningham said the speed at which companies and researchers were racing towards a vaccine was exciting — but also concerning. "It generally takes us eight to 18 years to produce a vaccine, the shortest is about four years," he said. "We're seeking to do this, which everyone is saying, within 12 to 18 months. We have got to be careful — we can't short change the checks on safety. "But this is going to require alliances, and I see a lot of collaboration happening around the world; people are energised by the emergency."Collaborations big and swiftPharmaceutical giants Sanofi and GSK joined forces last month to look at developing a vaccine. Pfizer, another global pharmaceutical leader, is collaborating with a German biotech, while Johnson and Johnson, the biggest pharmaceutical company in the world, has committed US$1 billion ($1.6 billion) in collaboration with the US Government to try and find a vaccine. While it is not unusual to see collaborations in the sector, big pharma intellectual property expert and Herbert Smith Freehills partner Rebekah Gay said the speed at which these agreements were moving was "extraordinary". "There's been a willingness on the part of companies to just get in and start working without being caught up in legal intricacies or arguments about intellectual property ownership," she said. "And what that means is we're seeing vaccine candidates in a timeline that we've never seen before."In Australia, CSL is the manufacturing or "industrial" partner of the University of Queensland's vaccine push — which is being part-funded by CEPI — and would produce it locally. But if a locally produced vaccine did not eventuate, CSL would work with the Australian Government in its negotiations with foreign governments, CEPI, other companies and research groups to bring the successful vaccine to Australia. Some experts predict any vaccine would need two doses, meaning manufacturers would have to work together to produce the near 15 billion doses to protect the world. Dr Basser, now senior vice-president of CSL vaccine arm Seqirus, said in the 11 years since swine flu the research community had woken up. And although there were still many uncertainties, he said the response to the COVID-19 threat so far had shown its development over the past decade. "This is not about a commercial return," he said. "This is about overcoming a threat to everybody. And that we could share appropriately if only one or two vaccines were successful. "And given the way the global vaccine ecosystem has behaved up until now, I am cautiously optimistic we'll find a solution."
US doctors say hydroxychloroquine is 'not promising' for treating coronavirus, but Donald Trump is taking it anyway
US President Donald Trump says he has started taking an anti-malaria drug that researchers say should not be used to combat coronavirus and has the potential to cause serious side effects. Studies from the US, France and China have concluded that hydroxychloroquine is not effective for treating COVID-19, and in April the US Food and Drug Administration warned its use could cause heart problems. Despite that, Mr Trump has called the drug a "game changer" in the fight against COVID-19, and now says he has been taking it for more than a week. In Australia, hydroxychloroquine has been spruiked by Clive Palmer, who took out back-to-back full-page newspaper advertisements to claim his foundation had bought 32,900,000 doses of it. Here's what we know about hydroxychloroquineWhat is hydroxychloroquine?An arrangement of hydroxychloroquine tablets. Several studies in different countries have yet to show benefits for coronavirus patients taking hydroxychloroquine.(AP: John Locher)It is usually in tablet form and regulates the activity of the immune system. It has mostly been prescribed to treat malaria, lupus and rheumatoid arthritis. Hydroxychloroquine has also been used for years to dampen the immune system in people with autoimmune conditions. In the US, conditional emergency use for adults hospitalised with a coronavirus infection has been approved by the USFDA, while in Australia a trial is underway using Australian Defence Force personnel. Research into its potential risks is ongoing. Why has it been linked to coronavirus?In clinical trials, hydroxychloroquine has been shown to stop coronavirus from entering cells. But that doesn't mean it would work outside lab conditions as a treatment. "One of the key things is that a lot of these drugs we find are going to be effective against the virus just in cells, [and] probably won't be that effective in the disease setting," Dr Larisa Labzin, an immunologist at the University of Queensland, said. "Really what we're looking for is not just that these drugs inhibit the virus replicating in people, but also that the people who get sick with the virus actually do better."Because hydroxychloroquine is already used in treatments for other conditions it can be fast-tracked in development to go straight to large human trials, unlike other drugs that would need to go through more tests first. In March, there was a surged in demand for hydroxychloroquine, driven by claims about its potential as a coronavirus treatment. That led to pharmacists being told to stop dispensing it so there would be enough supply for those who needed it as part of treatment for rheumatoid arthritis and malaria. Does it work for coronavirus?Several prominent doctors say they are worried that people could decide to take hydroxychloroquine because of Mr Trump's actions. "There is no evidence that hydroxychloroquine is effective for the treatment or the prevention of COVID-19," said Dr Patrice Harris, president of the American Medical Association. "The results to date are not promising."International research efforts have not yet found any benefits of taking the drug for those with coronavirus. A study from France concluded the drug did not significantly reduce admission to intensive care or deaths among patients with severe cases. A randomised clinical trial from China showed no improvement for patients with mild or moderate symptoms who were prescribed hydroxychloroquine. The drug made no difference in rates of clearing the virus and did not reduce the duration of symptoms, but did cause side effects. Two earlier large observational studies, each involving around 1,400 patients in New York, found no benefit from hydroxychloroquine. Going even further, two studies published last week in the leading medical journal BMJ concluded that hydroxychloroquine should not be used in the treatment of coronavirus. What are the possible side effects?The USFDA has released emergency-use guidelines for hydroxychloroquine outlining warnings for its potential side effects. They are:Dangerously rapid heart rateAbnormal heart rhythmsProblems with the heart muscle properly recharging between beatsIssues with the heart's ability to pump blood around the bodySevere hypoglycemiaRupturing of red blood cellsLow counts for platelets and red and white blood cellsLiver failureKidney failureIncreased risk of seizuresPsychosisDeliriumSuicidal behaviourHallucinationsRetina damageWhat is the Australian connection?The Australian Defence Force is testing Chloroquine, from which hydroxychloroquine is derived, on its personnel as a potential preventative measure against COVID-19. The resumption of trials of the drug has horrified an East Timor veteran who has been suffering long-term health issues after taking part in a controversial clinical trial of the drug almost 20 years ago. So far, 42 personnel have enrolled and started the 14-week trial, and Defence is seeking up to 700 civilian and ADF frontline healthcare workers to volunteer. Associate Professor Jane Quinn, a pharmacology researcher at Charles Sturt University's School of Veterinary Sciences, said she did not think there was currently enough international evidence of efficacy to justify the ADF trial. "Chloroquine is a drug that's been used for a very long time in the prevention and treatment for malaria and over time it's become increasingly out of favour particularly for having quite a significant side-effect profile," she said. "That's what makes it a little bit surprising that Chloroquine, particularly, is being suggested for use in this ADF trial."Which other drugs are being looked at?The experimental antiviral drug remdesivir, which belongs to a group used to treat HIV and hepatitis C, has shown some promise in the lab for treating SARS, MERS and coronavirus. Mr Trump has said he wants the USFDA to approve the drug "as quickly as they can". But early studies of its use have been criticised for lacking proper control measures, and two trials in China were suspended. Scientists are now waiting for the results of large randomised controlled trials in the US and Europe. The US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) has been giving the drug to some patients hospitalised with COVID-19 and lung complications. Preliminary results released in late April showed patients recovered 31 per cent faster with remdesivir than with a placebo. However, with conflicting data coming from a range of experiments, experts have urged caution. Remdesivir, which failed as a treatment for Ebola, is designed to disable the mechanism by which certain viruses, including coronavirus, make copies of themselves and potentially overwhelm their hosts' immune system.
Coronavirus combines with end to interest-only home loans in big hit coming for investors, experts warn
House prices are tipped to fall by 11 per cent over the next three years as the COVID-related economic downturn bites, and for one group of Australian homeowners, it could not come at a worse time. Key points:Many small-scale investors use interest-only loans to buy propertyThese loans convert to principal and interest after a set timeThis increases financial pressure for those hit by the COVID downturnThere are an estimated 730,000 investors, many of whom are self-funded retirees or people planning for retirement, who have taken out interest-only bank loans in the belief property was a safe bet. Coronavirus has already delivered challenges, including rent arrears and the prospect of losing their tenants altogether. But now these private landlords are facing big hikes in their monthly bank repayments as they switch from interest-only to paying off the principal of their loans as well. Max Green is one of many who has been trying to negotiate with the banks for an extension to the interest-only period of his loans. The 69-year-old and his partner have bought two properties — one in Brisbane, the other in Perth — in the past 10 years to help fund their retirement. But the value of the Brisbane property has flatlined and the Perth property, a unit in the city's outer suburbs, has plummeted from $425,000 in 2016 to $300,000 today, according to a recent valuation. "The intent was … to provide us with some equity growth in the properties, which would then assist us in the future once I had retired," Mr Green said. "We had been advised that we would be able to extend the interest-only period."Instead, the couple face paying an additional $1,900 a month from July as they begin to pay off both the principal and interest on their loans. Mr Green said he still enjoyed his work as a project manager at WA's Water Corporation, but conceded his retirement ambitions had not gone to plan. He said he would now be forced to either keep working beyond 70, dip into the couple's superannuation to pay the banks, or sell at a loss. Investors brace for massive lossesOthers with similar investment plans have already decided to cut their losses and are now facing negative equity as a result — where their home is worth less than the amount they owe. Wayne Grimes, 50, said he couldn't help but laugh when he considered the price he would likely now get for his luxury investment unit. "I'm laughing because it is just ridiculous," he said. "I bought it for $670,000 … and I'll be lucky if I'm able to sell it for $400,000."The two-bedroom, two-bathroom house in the inner-city area of West Perth has been on the market for five weeks, but Mr Grimes has wanted to sell it since 2017 when his interest-only loan was converted to principal and interest. "Originally when I bought that place I was getting $895 a week in rent and now I get about $415 a week," Mr Grimes said. "That coupled with [paying] principal and interest, there has been a big hit to our cash flow."Like many investors, Mr Grimes put his savings into property to try to get ahead for retirement. "The whole idea behind it was so that we wouldn't have to rely on government pensions and government handouts when we got older, that we would be self-sufficient and create our own wealth," he said. "But it hasn't worked out that way."Mr Grimes said his bank had been very helpful in allowing him to defer his loan payments for six months due to coronavirus, which would buy him time to sell the West Perth property, albeit at a huge a loss. He faced being left with a $180,000 debt. "I'm not here to blame anyone, it's no-one's fault, it's just that this is how the market has gone," he said. Call for interest-only extensions by defaultSenior Liberal MP Dean Smith has raised the prospect of a "tsunami of forced sales" by desperate landlords offloading properties in a falling market. The party's chief whip in the Senate said he had received reports from investors around the country struggling with mortgage repayments. Some had been forced to sell, while others were at risk of losing their own homes. Sharp rise in unemployment could trigger house price crashThe spread of coronavirus across Australia could see unemployment reach about 10 per cent and house prices drop 20 per cent, says one economist. "If property investors are forced to sell into a falling market, then that is a cost that every Australian property owner will have to bear," he said. "That will put downward pressure on an already dampened property market and that will harm the financial wellbeing of every Australian family that owns a property, not just property investors."The West Australian senator argued the banks should by default, honour requests by borrowers to extend their interest-only periods to help them ride out the COVID crisis. "Some of the stories these property investors have told me are heartbreaking and the banks should be ashamed," he said. "What I see is a great opportunity for a non-taxpayer-funded stimulus where the banks could be more responsive to ease some of that financial pressure that people who are on interest-only repayment arrangements are experiencing just before they move to principal and interest."Senator Smith said extending interest-only loan periods had been common practice before regulators imposed responsible lending limits in 2015, but those restrictions had since been eased. He was seeking support from Government, Opposition and crossbench MPs for an inquiry into interest-only loans and the banks' handling of them during the COVID crisis. Banks already helping '700,000' customersThe Australian Banking Association would not comment directly on Senator Smith's call for banks to roll over interest-only terms by default during the COVID pandemic. But chief executive Anna Bligh said in a statement the industry had worked tirelessly since the beginning of the outbreak to help businesses and individuals doing it tough. Ms Bligh said 700,000 customers had already applied for, or been granted, support on loans totalling more than $200 billion. "Investors whose tenants are unable to pay rent as a result of COVID-19 are able to access a six-month deferral to mortgage repayments, including principal and interest, to help them get through to the other side of this crisis," she said. "Interest-only options are still available to customers, with banks needing to assess a request to remain on interest-only repayments on a case-by-case basis, in line with regulators' prudential requirements and guidance."Analyst fears a 'perfect storm' comingThe impact of forced sales by investors facing negative equity would certainly place further downward pressure on the housing market, according to CoreLogic head of research Tim Lawless. "I think it's something that lenders will be very conscious of once we reach the expiry of the leniency policies that are in place at the moment, which will be towards the end of September. That's something we need to watch very carefully," he said. But Mr Lawless said he believed the impact on many borrowers of switching to principal and interest (P&I) would be cushioned by the significant fall in interest rates. "The interest-only loans typically have a mortgage rate of around about 3.5 per cent, whereas a principle and interest loan will typically have a interest rate of 3.2 per cent, so there could be some cost-saving there for those investors who do transition from interest-only to P&I," he said. "By and large the best strategy … would be to try to secure the best P&I mortgage rate possible and pay their debt down rather than just continuing to pay off their interest. "But of course not everybody can do that."Analyst Martin North, from Digital Finance Analytics, said 8 per cent of property investors were looking to offload their properties in the coming months. Mr North said the COVID-19 crisis had created another pressure point for investors already struggling with the migration of their loans to principal and interest, plus other factors. "We've got a perfect storm emerging, particularly for property investors," he said. "We've had a very significant increase in the number of units on the market and some of those would have previously been used by international students, but of course they didn't come back [for the new term]. "Some of those would have been used by Airbnb, but they haven't come back."But Mr North said he did not support Senator Smith's call on banks to extend the interest-only terms for property investors. "Strategically, it does not make a lot of sense to me," he said. "We've got to deal with the amount of debt in the system. "We have too many property owners with too much debt, they're too leveraged."
Qantas enforces new coronavirus precautions on flights, but no social distancing
Qantas has unveiled new measures to prevent the spread of COVID-19 on its flights — but social distancing is not one of them. "Social distancing on an aircraft isn't practical the way it is on the ground," Qantas medical director Dr Ian Hosegood said. "Given the low transmission risk on board, we don't believe it's necessary in order to be safe."It comes a week after Qantas chief executive Alan Joyce told the ABC that his company was seeking an exemption from social-distancing rules with the Federal Government. The airline will roll out its "Fly Well" safety measures from June 12. Pre-flight safetyPassengers will notice some major differences before they board a Qantas or Jetstar plane:Contactless check-in (via the airline's website or app) and self-serve bag drop are "strongly encouraged"There will be hand sanitising stations at the departure gates, and more regular cleaning"Increased physical distancing" at Qantas Lounges (but not on the flight itself)On-board precautionsQantas has also outlined its safety measures, in lieu of social distancing:It will provide masks to all passengers — wearing one is "not mandatory", but is recommended for "everyone's peace-of-mind""Enhanced cleaning" with a focus on seats, seatbelts, overhead lockers, air vents and toiletsOnce passengers are seated, they will be asked to "limit movement" around the cabin. They will also receive sanitising wipes to wipe down seat belts, trays and armrests themselvesThe airline will "encourage" passengers to download the Government's COVIDSafe app and "require" them to follow strict hygiene protocols'Extremely low' riskIn a statement, the airline said its air conditioning would get rid of almost all viruses on board. "The air-conditioning systems of all Qantas and Jetstar aircraft are already fitted with hospital-grade HEPA filters, which remove 99.9 per cent of all particles including viruses."It also said the cabin air was refreshed, on average, every five minutes during the flight. Dr Hosegood said there were a number of reasons why the risk of being infected with coronavirus onboard was "extremely low". "That's due to a combination of factors, including the cabin air filtration system, the fact people don't sit face-to-face and the high backs of aircraft seats acting as a physical barrier."Five-minute window of infectionThe Transport Workers Union said Qantas' new measures were not enough, accusing the airline of "downplaying" the risks. "At least 60 workers across the Qantas Group have been infected with the virus," the TWU said in a statement. "A dossier compiled by TWU safety experts revealed systematic failing in how Qantas dealt with an Adelaide Airport cluster, which saw 34 workers infected and over 750 quarantined.""It's hard for an airline to be profitable if social distancing were enforced," said Professor Raina MacIntyre, a virologist at the University of New South Wales. "But being in an aircraft is a high risk … it's an enclosed space where lots of people congregate for long periods of time. "Also, if a passenger has COVID-19, they may show no symptoms."When asked about Qantas' air-conditioning system, Professor MacIntyre said the use of HEPA filters would help to limit the risk of catching coronavirus. She said the risk of infection also depended on whether Qantas was using "outside" air or "recycled" air — the riskier of the two options. Even refreshing the cabin air every five minutes might not be enough. "Studies of tuberculosis show that if you're sitting a few rows behind or in front of someone, you're at risk," she said. "In the five minutes between air changes, you're still at risk. "I have made a personal decision not to fly unless I'm vaccinated from COVID-19."Across the world, many governments and pharmaceutical companies are spending billions of dollars in a race to develop a coronavirus vaccine, which could be months or years away. Earlier this week, the World Health Organization (WHO) has even warned that COVID-19 may "never go away" and we might have to learn to live with it.
This is where Australians can travel during coronavirus lockdown
Over the past several weeks, Australia has successfully flattened the curve, making it one of just a handful of countries ready to start easing restrictions designed to stop the spread of coronavirus. But with NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian and Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk in a war of words over when state borders should reopen, it is clear not every leader is ready for life to return to some semblance of normal. All over the country, there have been strict quarantines enforced with few, if any, exemptions. Here's a rundown of what to expect in each state and territory. Where can Australians travel right now?Not overseas, that's for sure. The Federal Government made a decision to ban Australians from travelling overseas on March 26 and there are no plans to lift that rule until at least the end of the year. As for entering the country, only Australian citizens, permanent residents and their immediate family members can travel to Australia — but you had better be prepared to stay in mandatory quarantine for 14 days after arriving. Travellers who have a compassionate or compelling reason to travel to Australia will need to have an exemption from the Australian Border Force Commissioner before travelling. On the domestic front, there are only limited flights operating at the moment — sometimes just one per day between capital cities — and they are expensive!NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian and Tourism Minister Stuart Ayres have called for all states and territories to reopen borders by July 1, but Australians will most likely have to wait until July for more frequent flight routes to start up between states — perhaps even later for Queensland. What are the rules for travelling to each state?They are many and varied and strictly enforced. Here they are below. QueenslandPremier Annastacia Palaszczuk has said she won't be considering opening up the state's borders until at least September. So that means nobody is allowed into the Sunshine State unless they have a border pass. Queenslanders can travel freely to NSW and Victoria and don't need to quarantine but should reconsider their reasons for doing so. They can also travel to the Northern Territory and South Australia but will need to show why that travel is essential. If they can't, they'll go into a 14-day quarantine. Moving house or starting a new job, or attending to other essential tasks such as getting to a medical appointment or caring for a family member, all fall into the essential category. Residents who live on the borders of Queensland, NSW, South Australia and the Northern Territory are able to cross into different states more easily for work, school or medical services if that was usually a part of their routine. New South WalesRethink travelling to Queensland or South Australia if you live in NSW. Unless there's a good reason, you'll be denied entry. But travel to Victoria and the ACT isn't a problem. There is no need to quarantine or self-isolate back in NSW if you have travelled interstate. However, if you have symptoms, even mild symptoms like a cough, get tested. A person in Sydney can travel to visit someone in regional NSW and while they can stay overnight, they shouldn't be going anywhere for a holiday. Northern TerritoryQueensland, South Australia and Western Australia have just as strict border controls as the Northern Territory, so those in the Top End are best to just sit tight and enjoy their relative freedom compared to the rest of the country. Of course, if they really want to, they can go to NSW, the ACT and Victoria. Non-essential travellers to the state are required to go through a police control checkpoint to verify their medical status and purpose of travel. Those not eligible for an exemption must complete 14 days of forced quarantine. South AustraliaIt's perfectly fine for South Aussies to travel to NSW and Victoria with no need to quarantine. Those thinking of heading to Queensland, Tasmania or the Northern Territory without cause will be turned back. Everyone entering South Australia will be required to isolate for 14 days as well. Exemptions will apply for essential transport, workers providing essential goods and services, medical needs, freight and supply chain operations, residents of border communities, carers, and for police, emergency services and ambulance workers. TasmaniaTravel from the Apple Isle to Victoria and NSW is ok. Anywhere else, not so. Tasmanian residents will be able to complete quarantine at their home but non-residents will have to complete quarantine at government-provided accommodation. Essential travellers may be exempted from quarantine. VictoriaThe only other jurisdictions to share Victoria's relaxed border restrictions are NSW and the ACT, so Garden State residents can travel to both those places easily. Tasmania, South Australia, Queensland, Western Australia and Northern Territory won't let you in without a good excuse. Travelling to a holiday house within Victoria is still permitted if you own it, or often stay there. There are no requirements in Victoria to quarantine after travelling domestically. Australian Capital TerritoryThere are no border restrictions here and residents can flit between their state and NSW and Victoria with ease. Every other state will require a two-week period of quarantine when you enter. Canberrans should only travel outside of the Canberra region to visit family and friends for the purpose of providing care and support and they will need to abide by rules in the jurisdiction they are travelling to. Western AustraliaIf you live in the West, you can't get into neighbouring states Northern Territory and South Australia easily. But NSW, Victoria and ACT are fine — if you can find a flight to get you there. There is also a temporary closure of the Western Australian border in place which is being strictly policed. Travellers cannot enter Western Australia unless an exemption has been granted. I need to see my family – are there any exemptions?Yes, most states will allow entry or travel on compassionate grounds. Just make sure if you need to apply for an exemption ahead of time — such as in Queensland, Western Australia, Tasmania or South Australia — you do so before attempting to enter. Exemptions will be permitted for people who must cross a border for critical goods and services; a person who wishes to attend the funeral of an immediate family member, or; a person who wishes to visit a terminally ill or dying immediate family member. Participating in child custody arrangements, Family Court or parole and bail conditions are also valid reasons to travel. People who live near the borders of Queensland, NSW, South Australia or the Northern Territory can continue to travel for work or education into different states. These residents can also travel interstate to obtain essential goods and services, including to attend school or childcare, or obtain medical supplies or services or other essential services. But don't stay in your non-home state for longer than necessary.
This family skips meals to pay rent during the coronavirus pandemic — they say rent aid goes a long way
Jacky Pham and his wife both work as nail technicians. When social distancing measures to curb the COVID-19 pandemic were put in place two months ago, their jobs became redundant. But even though the couple had both lost their jobs, they still had to meet their $700 fortnightly rent payments for their home in Hobart's Sandy Bay suburb. "I'm in a difficult situation because of coronavirus. I don't have enough money to pay rent," Mr Pham said. "Sometimes we just skip one meal per day. "On a normal day, we eat two meals a day," Mr Pham said, adding some days they were down to one. Mr Pham said he contacted the Harcourts rental agency about having lost his income on March 26. He said he was given a form for rent deduction, which he filled out promptly, but had to keep following up. Mr Pham said the agency said the landlord had been "ignoring them" and the agency was not in a position to reduce rent without the landlord's permission. Two months after first flagging his predicament, Mr Pham is still paying the full price in rent. He has even resorted to asking his family in Vietnam for help, and was a day late in his last payment — for the first time ever. "I told the agency that I don't have enough money and that's why I have to lend money from my friend and my family. That's why I was late one day," he said. Harcourts property manager confirmed Mr Pham had flagged the change to his financial situation and inquired about rent relief. The manager said the landlord had not responded to requests to have his tenants' rent reviewed, and the agency could not make decisions on the landlord's behalf. However, the agent said Mr Pham was told he could pay as much rent as he could afford. Rent relief for those who've fallen through the cracksMr Pham is a foreign national and does not hold a permanent residency. This means he has not qualified for the Federal Government's JobKeeper or JobSeeker support during the pandemic. But from next week, he can apply for the Tasmanian Government's COVID-19 rent relief fund. The Government on Tuesday announced Tasmanians and visa holders who pay at least one-third of their income on rent, have less than $5,000 in savings and can prove they experience "extreme hardship" can access rent aid. The targeted support of a one-off $2,000 payment or four weeks' of rent covered also extends to tenants who are not covered by the Residential Tenancy Act. Attorney-General Elise Archer said many people had not been able to access JobKeeper and JobSeeker, and the new relief package benefits those who have previously fallen through the cracks. "We believe there remains some who are suffering extreme hardship and who require further assistance with rental payments," she said. "Payments will be made to landlords and it will be a requirement they pass on this level of assistance to renters to meet their rental obligations."Ms Archer estimated there were around 1,000 tenants in Tasmania who required this help. "We've uncapped the fund, so there isn't a limit. However, we believe that there could be up to $1.5 million dollars required," she said. The Tenants' Union of Tasmania solicitor Ben Bartl said there were around 26,000 temporary residents like Mr Pham in Tasmania, who did not get Federal Government support during the global pandemic. "We are getting calls every day from tenants who are unable to pay the rent. In some cases landlords are asking that they sell their possessions in order to pay the rent," he said. "These are desperate people in desperate circumstances and the Government should, where possible, provide assistance to them."He said the Tasmanian Government should be "congratulated" on putting in place the rent relief package, but the help could have come sooner. "In hindsight, yes, the Government should have moved sooner. But that said, the Government is one of the first in Australia to introduce this measure, and for that they are to be congratulated," he said. "We know that this initiative is in place until the 30th of June, which is when the emergency period is meant to end. "If COVID-19 does continue and tenants can demonstrate that they are in financial hardship, we would hope that the Government would step up and continue to provide additional funds."Mr Pham said his employer had already indicated he might not have a job to return to after restrictions are lifted. He said any help from the Government would go a long way. "I'm sure that I will apply for [rent relief]. With that financial support I can keep paying rent until I can get a new job," he said.
Brewers fear for their livelihoods as they pour millions of litres of beer down the drain amid coronavirus pandemic
Global beer consumption is expected to be a massive 800 million cases down on last year, forcing breweries across the world to pour millions of litres of beer down the drain due to coronavirus restrictions. Key points:France has to destroy 10 million litres of beer due to the pandemic, as beer needs to be consumed freshMore than half of Australia's independent brewers could go underMost of Germany's 9,700 beer-related festivals have been cancelledThe closure of pubs, bars and restaurants and the cancellation of major beer-drinking festivals, such as Munich's Oktoberfest, have left many breweries fighting for their survival. A traditional and family-owned brewery in southern Germany that has been operating for more than 400 years is just one of many businesses brought to its knees, closing its doors forever. Rabobank grains and oilseeds senior analyst Cheryl Kalisch Gordon said the world's beer drinkers were expected to consume 82 million hectolitres less than last year. "That's a lot of beer globally … and we don't expect less drinking of beer on-premises would be made up by additional at-home consumption," she said. "The challenge will be greatest for those companies or beer producers that rely on that on-premises consumption, and typically … that would be craft beer producers."Australia's craft brewers under threatThe Independent Brewers Association (IBA) recent survey of more than 650 craft breweries in Australia found more than half may not survive without government assistance. IBA board member Johnny Latta said some brewers lost 70 per cent of their revenue overnight while others based in regional towns had lost all their revenue. "There will be a lot of breweries that will not reopen," Mr Latta said. "Unfortunately, there will be a lot of beer that just goes to waste because it is ageing and fresh beer is what everyone wants."Tom Freeman, who owns Wilkadene Woolshed Brewery in South Australia's Riverland, said they had to find creative new avenues to stay afloat. "We rely a lot on tourism, that really was a big stress and the financial impact we will feel for many years, I suppose," Mr Freeman said. He believed they were lucky to be able to package beer onsite and offer free deliveries to customers in metropolitan and regional areas, but the brewery lost about 75 per cent of its income in April alone. France destroys 10 million litres of beerIn France, a country with more than 2,000 breweries, the Brewery Union said 10 million litres of beer — equivalent to four Olympic-sized swimming pools — would have to be destroyed after the cancellation of all major events before September due to the pandemic. "Brewers think it will be too late in June or July to consume their beers brewed last winter … they prefer to collect and destroy the products for a best guarantee of quality," brewery union Brasseurs de France said in a statement. Europe's largest beer-producing nation, Germany, saw most of its 9,700 annual beer-related festivals cancelled, leaving many breweries on the verge of ruin. The world's biggest beer festival — Oktoberfest, celebrated in Munich since 1810 — saw visitors drink 7.8 million litres of beer in 2019, but not this year. Press spokesman for the German Brewers' Association Marc-Oliver Huhnholz said the pandemic had a dramatic impact on the country's 1,500 breweries. "The situation worsens every day … the total damage for breweries is still not yet foreseeable," Mr Huhnholz said. "We still see a fatal domino effect: the conflagration in gastronomy is spreading to the brewing industry. "We share the assessment of the German HOTREC [hospitality association]: without additional government aid, irreparable economic damage is at risk … many breweries will not survive this existential crisis without emergency aid."Centuries-old brewery to shut downAmid the first losses due to the coronavirus crisis is one of Germany's oldest breweries. Operating since 1617, the family-owned Wernecker Bierbrauerei in Bavaria, which survived a revolution, crisis and two world wars, had to give up the fight. The brewery's closure in September will not only have an enormous impact on the family and its 26 employees but will also take away part of local history and tradition in the small town of Werneck in the brewery-rich state of Bavaria. Family member and brewery manager Christine Lang said the decision to stop brewing was heartbreaking. "The brewery is not just a job for us. It's our passion, it's part of our identity that falls away and it is very painful to see that," Ms Lang said. The family business lost most of its revenue overnight when coronavirus restrictions were put in place. Ms Lang said they decided to continue running the business until September in the hope of selling all of its beer. "We don't know yet if we have to destroy some of our beer. It hurts our hearts but we hope it can find its way to the beer lovers," she said.
Private health insurance dumped by thousands after coronavirus restrictions force service cancellations
Hordes of young Australians are abandoning their private health insurance policies after the coronavirus pandemic left health funds charging people for services many could no longer use. Key points:Data shows about 11,000 people aged between 25 and 29 abandoned private health insuranceDrop coincides with the introduction of Government restrictions on services because of COVID-19Consumer advocates say nothing has been done to address people's concerns with sectorIn the first glimpse of the impact of the crisis on the private health insurance industry, the latest data shows almost 11,200 people aged between 25 and 29 dumped their private health insurance in the three months to March 31. While there were increases in cover among some Australians, such as people aged between 70 to 79, overall the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) statistics showed about 9,800 Australians dropped their private health cover over the three month-period, as restrictions set in and the economic consequences of the pandemic began to hit. The trend of young people fleeing the sector has been a continuing concern for those within the industry and the Government, who fear the healthcare system could find itself in a "death spiral" if young and healthy people continue to abandon cover. The fall in policies coincided with the introduction of the Government's coronavirus restrictions, and the subsequent economic consequences of the pandemic. Consumer group CHOICE said the full impact of the crisis on the rate of private health insurance coverage would be seen in next quarter's statistics, with the latest data only taking into account the beginning of the pandemic. But CHOICE health campaigner Dean Price said even before COVID-19, the statistics were dire. "It's no wonder — nothing has been done to address people's concerns that private health insurance costs too much, is too confusing and offers too little value," he said. The coronavirus pandemic saw the Government put a stop to all "non-urgent" elective surgeries to conserve valuable resources like personal protective equipment (PPE) and help the health system prepare for an anticipated influx of patients. Some routine services like dental and eye care were also cancelled, as clinics prioritised urgent cases or shut down all together. It meant health funds were charging people for services many were no longer using. The APRA statistics showed, as a result, there was an almost 8 per cent decrease in hospital treatment benefits compared to the last quarter, while total benefits for medical specialties were also down about 8 per cent. To keep the COVID-19 outbreak under control we need to keep growth factor below 1.0Private Health Care Australia chief executive officer Rachel David said if the drop in benefits paid meant health funds were sitting on additional profits, they would look to pass that onto members. "Health funds gave a commitment that any additional funds resulting from COVID-19 related restrictions causing cancellation of some elective surgery and some allied health services would be returned to members," Dr David said. She said now the Government had given the green light for elective surgeries to resume, the industry was bracing for a surge in claims. "Health funds must remain well capitalised and prudentially sound throughout and beyond the COVID-19 crisis to fund the backlog of elective surgeries and allied health benefits," Dr David said. Health funds have acted to soften the financial blow of COVID-19, delaying a scheduled premium increase and reducing or cancelling waiting periods for people to make claims. But CHOICE reignited calls for a review into the system, accusing the industry of dragging its feet in passing on profits to consumers. "Policies that were poor value before COVID-19 have only become worse value as the industry dithers on returning their unexpected windfalls back to their customers," Mr Price said. "The Australian Government must review the whole system by undertaking a thorough public inquiry."
Chinese embassy ridicules Australia for claiming vindication for global coronavirus inquiry
China's embassy in Canberra says it is a joke for Australia to claim it has been vindicated by international support for a coronavirus inquiry. Key points:The World Health Assembly agreed to an inquiry in Geneva on Tuesday nightThe idea of an independent probe was pushed by Australia, but some aspects have been watered downThe Chinese embassy said the inquiry would be "totally different" to what Australia wantedAustralia was the second country, after the United States, to call for an independent inquiry into the global pandemic, a move which sparked a diplomatic row with China. But last night, at a meeting of the World Health Assembly (WHA) in Geneva, China indicated it would likely back a European Union motion that called for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive" evaluation of the response to the global outbreak. More than 100 countries, including Australia, had already co-signed the motion for the probe into the global outbreak. The motion then passed at the WHA gathering on Tuesday night. Some Coalition MPs and senators have been cheered by the broad international support for the inquiry, with former Cabinet minister Matt Canavan saying Australia had been "massively vindicated" by the "outpouring of support from other countries in the world". But Beijing's embassy in Canberra issued a statement saying the inquiry being considered by the WHA was "totally different" to the one Australia proposed and to claim vindication was "nothing but a joke". "A close look at the draft itself can easily come to such a conclusion," the embassy said in a statement. "All those who know the consultation process that led to the resolution understand this. "To claim the WHA's resolution a vindication of Australia's call is nothing but a joke."The skirmish came after China imposed an 80 per cent tariff on Australian barley overnight, all but killing a lucrative market for exporters. China's ambassador to Australia had previously warned there could be trade ramifications if the Federal Government pursued its bid for an investigation into the origins of coronavirus. Australia's initial inquiry bid watered downAustralia initially demanded that the inquiry be led by an organisation outside the World Health Organization (WHO), with Foreign Marise Payne saying it "strikes me as a bit poacher and gamekeeper". Australia has backed away — at least for now — from its call to hand WHO officials the same powers as weapons inspectors. But the Government argues that Australian officials worked hard to toughen up the language in the draft motion so it specifically says the inquiry must be impartial and independent. The Government also points out that the draft motion states the WHO should investigate the source of the virus, as well as how the virus jumped from animals to humans. Trade Minister Simon Birmingham called the embassy's comment "provocative" but said Australia would not engage in "cheap politicking" over COVID-19. "I would have thought the appropriate response from China's ambassador would be to welcome these outcomes and welcome the opportunity for us to work together on this important issue," he told Sky News. Senator Canavan said the stoush demonstrated why Australia would "need to move away from relying so much on China". "The conduct of the Chinese Government over this period, but also the last few years, has been hard to predict," he said. "It's an increased risk for Australian business. We have to work very hard to establish relationships with other countries."
COVID-19 is like three different diseases, says New York doctor, from flu-like illness to severe reactions and rare children's syndrome
Almost 10 weeks into the pandemic, COVID-19 is continuing to surprise and baffle health experts. In fact, experts' picture of exactly how COVID-19 might play out in the body is now quite different to what was thought as little as a few weeks ago, with some experts saying it could be better described as three different diseases. We have known for a while that the mild to moderate form of the disease — a flu-like illness with fever, muscle aches and respiratory symptoms, or often no symptoms at all — is almost like "child's play" compared to the major damage to organs like the the lungs, heart, brain, and kidneys seen when COVID-19 becomes severe. Umesh Gidwani, head of cardiac intensive care at New York's Mount Sinai Hospital, says that trying to treat the severe form of the disease is like facing a terrifying fire, burning out of control. "The patients we take care of [in intensive care] are those in whom the fire has already destroyed the house. But there continues to be embers and small fires. I can't enter the house because it's too hot and things are falling on me," he says. "[Severe disease] is almost a completely different animal [compared] to someone who is recovering at home with some chicken soup and paracetamol". And now it seems there is evidence of a third variation in illness that can occur following exposure to the virus — a mysterious new disease given the name paediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome, with an entirely different set of symptoms again. The syndrome seems to only affect children, unlike both mild and severe COVID-19, which mostly affect adults. However the link between the inflammatory syndrome and the virus that causes COVID-19 is not yet 100 per cent confirmed. The bottom line, says Dr Gidwani, is what we have been calling a single disease — COVID-19 — is really looking more like three separate diseases. He and others draw this conclusion based on how the virus affects the immune system. "The key disaster is the extent and severity of the immune response," he says. It is now clear the symptoms experienced by people with severe COVID-19 are largely caused by the body's disordered immune response to the virus rather than the virus itself, Dr Gidwani says. In fact, the disordered immune response in severe COVID-19 is the disease; they are one and the same thing. In contrast, with mild to moderate COVID, the immune response is more measured, with symptoms largely confined to the upper respiratory tract. But with severe COVID-19, the body's response to the infection goes into overdrive. In particular, substances called cytokines, which tell other parts of the immune system there is a problem that needs fixing in the body, and which coordinate the immune response, are released in excessive amounts. This creates what's known as a "cytokine storm", which ends up causing damage to healthy tissue. Doctors have seen similar cytokine storms in people with different kinds of infections or with certain cancers. But the cytokine storm with COVID-19 is wildly different. As a result, therapies that work for the other cytokine storms don't control the problem, Dr Gidwani says. "My brain is thinking 'what is going on? Is there a way to fix this?' I don't know what to do," he says. "It is very challenging, very frustrating, very upsetting."'This is a brand new disease'Understanding what makes the cytokine storm unique in severe COVID-19 is important as it means there may need to be a different approaching to helping patients get better. "This is a brand new disease. We are seeing more and more that the therapies we are used to working with don't necessarily produce the same results with COVID," Dr Gidwani says. One important difference is that the cytokine storm in severe COVID-19 results in widespread blood clotting, which can in turn trigger heart attacks, strokes, deep vein thrombosis (DVT), pulmonary embolisms (clots in veins in the lungs) and limbs so damaged they may need to be amputated. This can lead doctors to misjudge how sick a patient is and withdraw supportive measures such as a ventilator before they should. "It is important to realise this is a distinct [immune] syndrome and that you can therefore avoid certain pitfalls," says Dr Gidwani. "This is not what we expected at the outset. "But we never knew what to expect. I don't know what will happen next either."Over-activation of the immune system could be a major "unifying element" that explains a large part of why the disease can play out in such different ways in severe COVID-19 and in PMIS, says Australian cardiologist and blood vessel researcher Jason Kovacic. An immune attack on blood vessels potentially explains many of the key dangerous features of both conditions, says Dr Kovacic, who is Professor of Medicine and Cardiology both at New York's Icahn School of Medicine and the Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute at the University of NSW.
With more than 1.5 million confirmed cases and 90,000 Americans dead, US President Donald Trump is determined Americans will have coronavirus treatments manufactured there, handing out a billion dollar contract.
This story will be regularly updated throughout Wednesday. Wednesday's key moments:US seeks to end dependence on other countries for pharmaceutical drugsThe UK to face a 'severe recession' as official death tolls tops 35,000Formula One says quarantine exemptions must be provided for elite sportsSweden tops Europe COVID-19 deaths per capitaMike Pompeo called Taiwan a reliable partner prior of President Tsai Ing-Wen's swearing-inUS seeks to end dependence on other countries for pharmaceuticalsUnited States President Donald Trump's administration awarded a contract worth up to $US812 million ($1.2 billion) for a new US company to manufacture drugs and drug ingredients to fight COVID-19 on American soil, aiming to end dependence on other countries. The announcement comes as the US records more than 90,000 deaths and 1.5 million confirmed cases of the coronavirus, according to figures by Johns Hopkins University. The administration has been looking to build up the ability to produce drugs and their raw materials in the US after the global pandemic exposed the industry's dependence on China and India for its supply chain. The US Department of Health and Human Services said that it had awarded a 4-year, $US354 million contract to privately-held Phlow Corp to make COVID-19 drugs, other essential drugs and their ingredients. The contract can be extended for up to $US812 million over 10 years. Phlow said all pharmaceutical products will be made in the US and the contract will help it contribute to a national stockpile of active pharmaceutical ingredients for essential medicines. UK deaths top 35,000 but thousands more feared dead from COVID-19The death toll from coronavirus has topped 35,000 in Britain according to official government figures, but that figure could be closer to 45,000 according to the UK's Office for National Statistics (ONS). The rise was an increase of 545 on the figure provided on Monday. The official government figures, which come from the Department of Health and Social Care, differ from the ONS numbers as the include only people who died who had previously tested positive for COVID-19, whereas the ONS numbers include all suspected coronavirus deaths. Tuesday's numbers from the ONS paint a grim picture in care homes, more than a third of which have been stricken by COVID-19. Deaths in care homes across the United Kingdom topped 10,000 as of May 8, although the increase has slowed over the last couple of weeks. "Deaths in all settings including care homes are falling … but we need to do all we can to continue to protect the most vulnerable in our care homes," a spokesman for Prime Minster Boris Johnson said. Meanwhile the UK's treasurer warned parliament there would not be an immediate bounce-back for the nation's struggling economy as Britain recorded its highest number of people claiming unemployment benefits since 1996. "It is not obvious that there will be an immediate bounce-back," Chancellor of the Exchequer Rishi Sunak told the House of Commons, saying the retail sector, for example, would still face restrictions when it reopens. "We are likely to face a severe recession the likes of which we have never seen," he said. "In all cases, it will take a little bit of time for things to get back to normal, even once we have reopened currently closed sectors."The UK has been in lockdown since March 23 but some workers were asked to return to work last week. British F1 GP under threatFormula One said the UK Government's quarantine plans would rule out a British Grand Prix and affect tens of thousands of F1-related jobs if exemptions are not granted for sport. Ministers said they plan a 14-day quarantine for most people arriving in the country in the coming weeks to try to prevent a second peak in the COVID-19 pandemic. Formula One is planning two Grands Prix without spectators at Silverstone, which this year marks the 70th anniversary of hosting the first world championship race, immediately after two in Austria in early July. Seven of the 10 Formula One teams are based in England and plans for the season, which has yet to start due to the pandemic, would be disrupted by teams being forced into two weeks' quarantine every time they return from abroad. "A 14-day quarantine would make it impossible to have a British Grand Prix this year," a Formula One spokesperson said. "It has a major impact on literally tens of thousands of jobs linked to F1 and the supply chains. If all elite sport is to return to TV, then exemptions must be provided."WHO chief says he will keep leading virus response after US threatThe World Health Organization's head said he would keep leading the global fight against the coronavirus pandemic, after US President Donald Trump threatened to cut off funding and quit the body. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus defended the agency's role after the US again withheld full support for a resolution on the pandemic. "We want accountability more than anyone," Dr Tedros told a virtual meeting of the WHO'S 194 member states. "We will continue providing strategic leadership to coordinate the global response."The WHO declined to comment on Mr Trump's threat to quit the international organisation, saying only that it had received his letter and was considering its contents. Washington allowed the resolution calling for a review into the global response to the pandemic to pass by consensus, but said it objected to language about reproductive health rights and permission for poor countries to waive patent rules. The US mission in Geneva said in a statement that paragraphs on the right of poor countries to waive patents to obtain medicine during a health emergency would "send the wrong message to innovators" trying to produce new drugs and vaccines. They added that the WHO's reproductive healthcare language could be interpreted as requiring countries to permit abortion. "The United States believes in legal protections for the unborn," it said. Sweden tops Europe COVID-19 deaths per capitaSweden, which has opted for a more open strategy in combating the virus than other European countries, has the highest number of deaths in Europe per capita from the COVID-19 disease over the last seven days, data showed. Sweden has kept most schools, restaurant and businesses open during the pandemic. While deaths are on the decline, Sweden had 6.25 deaths per million inhabitants per day in a rolling seven-day average between May 12 and May 19, according to Ourworldinsata.org. That was the highest in Europe and just above the United Kingdom, which had 5.75 deaths per million. Over the course of the pandemic Sweden still has fewer deaths per capita than the United Kingdom, Spain, Italy, Belgium and France, which have all opted for lockdowns, but much higher than Nordic neighbours Denmark, Norway and Finland. Sweden's strategy, mostly based on voluntary measures regarding social distancing and basic hygiene, has been criticised by some as a dangerous experiment with peoples lives, but also been put forward as a future model by the WHO. Sweden's open strategy seems to have softened the blow on the economy, with growth shrinking much less than in Denmark and Norway in the first quarter. Wuhan tests more than 400,000 people for COVID-19 in one dayThe city of Wuhan, the original epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak in China, conducted 467,847 nucleic acid tests on one day in May 18, a local health authority said. The staggering number is up from the 335,887 tests a day earlier. Wuhan kicked off a campaign to test all of its 11 million residents last week to look for asymptomatic carriers — infected people who show no outward sign of illness. On May 9-10, the city confirmed its first cluster of COVID-19 infections since it reopened from a 76-day lockdown in April. Mike Pompeo praises Taiwan's coronavirus responseUnited States Secretary of State Mike Pompeo congratulated Taiwan's President Tsai Ing-Wen on her re-election, praised the country's coronavirus response and called it a reliable partner. "We have a shared vision for the region — one that includes rule of law, transparency, prosperity, and security for all," Mr Pompeo said in a statement. His statement sharply contrasted recent US criticisms of China, which claims Taiwan as a province. Since the coronavirus was discovered in China's Wuhan province less than six months ago, tensions have mounted between the United States and its trade-war foe China. "The recent COVID-19 pandemic provided an opportunity for the international community to see why Taiwan's pandemic-response model is worthy of emulation," Mr Pompeo said. China views Ms Tsai, who will be sworn into office for her second and final term on Wednesday (local time), as a separatist bent on formal independence for Taiwan. At her inauguration, Ms Tsai is expected to say that Taiwan will seek to "actively participate" in international bodies and deepen its cooperation with like-minded countries, generally a reference to the United States and its allies. Spaniards to change habits post lockdownSpain lifted a ban on direct flights and ships from Italy but maintained a block on cruise ships, as a survey showed the coronavirus outbreak had put locals off travelling. A reduced death rate from COVID-19 has encouraged Spain, with the world's fourth-highest number of infections, to begin easing one of Europe's strictest lockdowns. But the tourism-dependent economy is likely to have to wait until late June to welcome holidaymakers back. Madrid surprised its European partners by introducing a two-week quarantine last week. In Barcelona, people living within a kilometre of a beach will be allowed to sunbathe on the sand from Wednesday (local time). The pandemic has become Spaniards' biggest worry, and most of them plan to change habits when they are free to move, according to a poll by the Government's Centre for Sociological Studies. Just 14 per cent of those surveyed said they planned to travel abroad when the lockdown is lifted. Big purchases are on hold — only 4.2 per cent were thinking about buying a new car and 3.4 per cent a house. Bars and restaurants will have to coax back the 30 per cent of people who said they preferred not to eat outside their homes.
World Health Assembly formally adopts independent review into handling of coronavirus pandemic
The World Health Assembly has formally adopted a resolution calling for an independent review into the handling of the coronavirus pandemic. Key points:Australia was vocal in calling for the independent review, straining relations with BeijingDespite initial doubt, China added its name to the resolution before it passedThe review will investigate the global response to the pandemicDelegates applauded when the draft resolution passed without objection at a meeting in Geneva. Australia was among the nations to call for an independent probe, which put a strain on relations with Beijing. Foreign Minister Marise Payne said Australia welcomed the news. "The resolution commits to an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation into COVID-19, at the earliest appropriate moment, to review the lessons learned from the international health response coordinated by the World Health Organization (WHO)," she said. "Australia will continue to be a consistent and constructive voice in the international community to advance and protect our national interest and the global interest."Health Minister Greg Hunt, who addressed the assembly on Monday, said he was "delighted" with the passing of the motion. Delighted that the WHA Assembly has passed by consensus the Motion calling for an impartial, independent & comprehensive examination of the global response to COVID-19. China ultimately agreed to co-sponsor the resolution, adding its name to the document shortly before it was adopted. Chinese President Xi Jinping had earlier declared his country would support a review led by the World Health Organization, but only once the virus was brought under control. That led to some Australian Government MPs and senators claiming vindication for Australia's position. But Beijing's embassy in Canberra issued a statement saying the inquiry being considered by the WHA was "totally different" to the one Australia proposed, saying that to claim vindication was "nothing but a joke". "A close look at the draft itself can easily come to such a conclusion," the embassy said in a statement. During a media conference on Tuesday evening, China's foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said Australia's advocacy for the probe was improper. "China has stated its stand multiple times about Australia's independent probe on the epidemic," he said. "We firmly oppose political manoeuvring on the epidemic. "In fact, this kind of action isn't proper, won't win people's hearts and won't succeed."
Coronavirus misinformation and confusion plagues health workers
Dr Charlotte Hespe was upset when she saw acquaintances circulating emails that promoted bogus coronavirus prevention measures. To make it worse, the information claimed to be from an infectious disease expert when it wasn't. In her Sydney general practice, visitors have requested prescriptions for hydroxychloroquine — the anti-malarial drug promoted by US President Donald Trump as a treatment for coronavirus, despite a lack of evidence for it working. Key points:Patients are coming to doctors with misunderstandings and asking for unproven treatmentsIn a health crisis this can be a particular challenge for doctors, some of whom are themselves being put at riskSome experts say the problem is fed by uncertainty about the disease as well as sensational media and online networksHealthcare workers across the country are dealing with a global contagion of online misinformation and confusion about COVID-19, as well as the pandemic itself. Some experts say this is fed by uncertainty about the disease and people's understandable need for concrete information that will keep friends and family safe. But at their worst, such misunderstandings or falsehoods can put health workers and institutions dangerously in the spotlight. For example, in early April, the NSW Nurses and Midwives' Association reported workers were being told by hospital administrators not to wear their uniforms to work after incidents of abuse by people who believed they were spreading the virus. There have been reports of Victorian staff being racially profiled. Hospitals have also been targeted. In the United States, and to a much lesser extent in Australia, people who claim the crisis is exaggerated or invented have encouraged their followers to film health facilities. Dr Vyom Sharma, a general practitioner in Melbourne, said he's most concerned about people who may still doubt the importance of hygiene and social distancing. "The grand irony is that because we've done so well [in Australia] that people don't see how horrific the consequences are," he said. "I don't see us winning this war on misinformation right now. Despite all the things Australia has done well, the one place we have always been behind [in] is the information battle."The risks of unproven treatments and early researchWhile Facebook, Twitter and YouTube now promote links to the World Health Organization and local health bodies, these messages compete in the newsfeed against misinformation or sensational news reports that are often more emotional and engaging, and thus more shareable. For Dr Hespe, medical research from early studies that have not been peer reviewed has been the greatest challenge. She's fielded questions about the impact of pain killers and anti-inflammatory drugs on COVID-19, off the back of early studies regarding ibuprofen and other drugs that have been widely distributed. The patients who asked her for hydroxychloroquine, meanwhile, had been advised by relatives. "They had younger family members who'd heard about it, done some basic research and decided that dad should have it, and so sent dad to have the conversation with the GP," she said. A French study that explored the use of the anti-malarial drug, which was tweeted by President Trump, has had almost 54,000 Facebook interactions according data from the monitoring platform Crowdtangle — an extraordinary number for a relatively dry medical journal paper that has since come under scrutiny by the journal's publishers. Dr Hespe said the media must understand the potential impact when discussing possible COVID-19 treatments that are still unproven. "Not over-promising and under-delivering, even though it's exciting in a news sense," she said. How to talk about conspiracy theoriesDr Chris Moy, the Australian Medical Association's South Australian president, suspects people who have embraced more extreme ideas about COVID-19 — that it was caused by 5G or even Bill Gates — may be unlikely to seek medical care. As a GP in Adelaide, he said he sees patients who don't necessarily believe such theories themselves, but have close relatives who do and are struggling with how to address this lack of shared reality. Of course, scientists are still learning about the disease and how best to treat it — a difficult reality when people want clear, actionable information now to protect themselves and their families. "It is the right mix for a lot of misinformation to happen, but the flip side is, the main messages did get through in the end," he said. Patient autonomy is a "bedrock" of contemporary medicine, said Connal Lee, a health ethicist at the University of South Australia. He suggested medical professionals should understand a patient's experience and start a conversation if they seem doubtful about the doctor's recommendation. "We have seen how a harmful side of misinformation can and does emerge — recently in Melbourne and in the US there have been protests and gatherings that flout the rules and put others in danger," Dr Lee said. "The problem with certain conspiracy groups is that no matter how we respond, it simply feeds into the theory, so we need to be mindful that intervention will not always be successful."A danger to the patient, and the communityDr Sharma in Melbourne is concerned about the risk patients may pose to others if they consume and act on misinformation — as well as the health workers that will treat them if they become ill. He has dealt with the perception among some patients that COVID-19 is a mild illness, for example, just like a cold or flu. "This has the sum total effect of … people just not getting tested," he said. "It informs people's decisions to not socially distance or [to] be much more lax with it."He encourages patients to "fact check" with official sources when they see questionable health information circulating on platforms like WeChat. Dr Sharma agrees with Dr Lee that it's important to make time for a conversation with patients about any contentious views, but the need to do this is even more urgent with COVID-19. Time matters. It's not just the patient's wellbeing at stake if they believe COVID-19 isn't that dangerous or that staying home isn't important, it's about the community's health. "There's a huge asymmetry here," Dr Sharma said. "The risk that an individual poses to the community as a link in the chain of transmission is actually much greater than the risk to themselves."
5G, bioweapons and distrust: Coronavirus conspiracy theories are putting strain on families
You might try to ignore it at first: Your aunt's YouTube videos about how coronavirus is a bioweapon. The former workmate forwarding 5G conspiracy theories on WhatsApp. The pandemic has quickly changed everything — we're confined to our homes, glued to our screens — and among some families and friends, the virus has also fractured a shared sense of what is fact, what is true. Sarah's* father sends her links to websites full of jumbled ideas and misrepresented data. He doubts how dangerous the disease is, and because he's in his 70s, she fears for his safety. "It floored me initially," she says. "He was telling us he was off to do the shopping...still wanting to visit [his family], still wanting us to visit him."She won't let the rabbit holes he goes down derail their relationship, but she longs, during this often dismal and anxious moment, to be on the same page. Imagine vaccines, for example, not just in terms of how they affect our individual body, but also in how they affect "the collective body of a community", as Eula Biss wrote in her book, On Immunity. This means we can be quick to anger when faced with misinformation about infectious disease, suggests Julie Leask, a professor at the University of Sydney's Faculty of Medicine and Health, who has researched anti-vaccination views and how to respond to them. "The way someone thinks and acts on an infectious disease doesn't just affect them, it affects the health of other people," Dr Leask says. Cutting tiesIt can be easy to dismiss coronavirus conspiracy theorists, with their janky YouTube videos and Facebook tirades, but if we want to talk to family and friends who have been persuaded, we must first understand their appeal. Dr Leask describes it as "causal hunger" — the desire to know, where did this illness come from and how can I fight it?"People develop folk tales around disease causation, to make sense of it and find a path for prevention," she says. Sharing conspiracy theories can also be a way for someone to signal who they are — that they are suspicious of authority, or conservative or progressive — suggests Nick Enfield, who heads the Sydney Initiative for Truth at Sydney University. "If there is already some kind of disagreement or rift or difference of ideology or identity … often that's exactly how that comes to the surface," Professor Enfield says. And while these theories may be ignored at Christmas dinner, during a pandemic, some families feel pushed to take a stand. Fiona, 41, and her partner have found themselves avoiding her mother-in-law and her partner over their beliefs about the virus, which she feels have grown more extreme. While she knew her mother-in-law was anti-vaccination, they never really talked about it and maintained a good relationship. The coronavirus outbreak has taken the brakes off. Many of her mother-in-law's beliefs seem to have emerged from YouTube, where hawkers of conspiracy theories that claim social distancing and 5G are means of totalitarian government control have found an audience. "When they're listening to these people on YouTube, it does feel like they belong to a movement or almost like religion," Fiona says. The decision to pause her daughter's visits with her mother-in-law was profoundly difficult, but she and her partner were worried their five-year-old might become frightened by what her grandmother shared about vaccines or the virus. "My daughter misses seeing her nanna," she says. "Because it's toxic, the whole conversation. In order to remove that toxicity, it means that you miss out on the good stuff."Triaging for othersTatiana Ikasovic, 28, an Australian actor in Los Angeles, tries to triage the explosion of coronavirus misinformation she's seen from family and friends on Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp. She makes decisions each day about how to react. If it's an older person, she might be more sympathetic — perhaps they're not familiar with YouTube and aren't sure how to distinguish trustworthy sources from untrustworthy. Often she reminds herself that she doesn't know why people hold particular viewpoints — whether there is a personal reason they're distrustful of authorities. But it bothers her most when young people who haven't been affected by the virus, who are "just on the internet all day", share posts claiming the virus isn't real or that it's the government's attempt to implement a fascist system. "I find that incredibly disrespectful to people who have known people who have died from this illness, and to healthcare workers," Tatiana says. Have you seen something about coronavirus that doesn't seem right?False stamp over social media appsIf something pops up in your feeds or inboxes, please help us by uploading screenshots, photos, videos or links, and tell us how it got to you. She suggests trying to find common ground where possible even if they are "a dead-set true believer". "It's different if they're acting in a way that's harmful to you, or your family or other people," she says. But we shouldn't only be concerned about the people who believe in conspiracy theories, but those who might be exposed to them. If you have an audience among your family on a Zoom call or in Facebook comments, for example, Dr Leask says it can be important to debunk information "quickly, calmly and respectfully". She advises checking where someone first heard the conspiracy theory, about 5G causing the virus, for example, and gauging their strength of belief. If they seem to be simply testing out a theory, you could respond with personalised language along the lines of: "from what I can see, it looks like COVID-19 was caused by a virus passed from humans and that it passes from person to person."Her research on anti-vaccination beliefs suggests it is best to "be brief, be factual, be evidence informed, don't shoot from the hip". Hydroxychloroquine, ibuprofen and blood typeWhat's the verdict on these health myths?Australians are being asked to be on a "team", to stay at home for the public good, but this assumes we share a set of beliefs about the danger of the disease and trust in authorities. Coronavirus is remarkably new and our understanding of it evolves every day, making it even harder for some people to establish a common set of facts with friends and family. Fiona just wants a way to help her relatives out of the YouTube vortex. When they send her videos about vaccination and the pandemic, it seems to come from a place of genuine concern and fear for her health, and the health of her daughter. "I feel like I'm helpless in even helping them, because I think it's so sad they're so distressed by it all," she says. "I'd love to come to them with some stuff, and say 'hey, stop stressing yourselves out, these are the actual facts'."While social media allows what were once fringe ideas to become easily accessible, Dr Enright says we should also remember that broadly they remain marginal overall. "The responsibility is partly on all of us to try and help develop that culture of understanding... and to understand science better than we do," he says. "To have respect for it, and be happy to change our position."
What the WHA is and why it could be very important for an inquiry into the coronavirus pandemic
As the coronavirus pandemic continues a dominate global politics, another health entity has entered the discussion. While the World Health Organization (WHO) has been the focus of the fight against COVID-19, Federal Health Minister Greg Hunt has highlighted the World Health Assembly (WHA) as a focus in the near future. The WHA does not get a lot of publicity, but it could become significant in global politics in the coming days. What is the WHA?The WHA is an annual meeting of all 194 members of the WHO. The assembly is held every May, with delegates from each nation travelling to the Swiss city of Geneva to meet and make decisions on global health, according to the WHO website. This year's event will be the 73rd edition of the assembly, but due to coronavirus, it will be held online. It will be held on May 18-19 — so tonight and Tuesday night, Australian time. According to the WHO website, COVID-19 will take up the majority of the discussion. There are several objectives at each assembly. Making decisions about global health issues is the main objective. These decisions are important because they will direct the policies of the WHO for the next 12 months. Decisions are ordinarily dictated by the WHA executive board, a group of 34 health professionals appointed to the role. Dr Lisa Studdert is Australia's representative on the executive board. Members also elect a president and five vice-presidents of the WHA for the next year. Why is the WHA in the news?Australia, along with other countries including the United States, has called for an independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus pandemic. The WHA meeting will consider a motion, drafted by the European Union, calling for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of the "international health response to COVID-19". Mr Hunt is expecting around 120 other nations to back that call. Calls for an inquiry have angered China, which has started a trade dispute with Australia. Chinese media is reporting that President Xi Jinping will deliver a speech at the WHA opening ceremony, at the invitation of WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. The United States has not said if it will back the motion. The ABC understands that United States diplomats are pressing for tougher language that calls for a probe into how the virus started in China. But Australian diplomats do not expect the US to vote against the motion as it stands. US President Donald Trump has repeatedly accused China of covering up the outbreak and allow coronavirus to spread around the world. Has there been any other news about the WHA?The island of roughly 23 million will again not have a seat at the table when the assembly starts. As it is considered part of China, Taiwan is represented by delegates from Beijing. But Taiwan wants a seat at the table and has attended as an observer in the past. Taiwan's Foreign Ministry earlier this month complained that official coronavirus data and prevention methods it had provided to the WHO were not being shared with the international body's member states. World leaders including Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and Canada's Justin Trudeau have called for WHO to grant Taiwan full membership. The US State Department has campaigned for the WHO to allow Taiwan a place at the table. Australia, too, backs Taiwan joining the organisation, but only as an observer. Today Reuters reported that Taiwan was shelving its push for observer status in order to allow the WHA to focus on the coronavirus issue. "Despite all our efforts and an unprecedented level of international support, Taiwan has not received an invitation to take part," Foreign Minister Joseph Wu told reporters. "The Ministry of Foreign Affairs expresses deep regret and strong dissatisfaction that the World Health Organization Secretariat has yielded to pressure from the Chinese government and continues to disregard the right to health of the 23 million people of Taiwan."
Positive coronavirus tests in aged care residents close two more nursing homes in Melbourne
Two more cases of coronavirus are being investigated at Victorian nursing homes in addition to the case reported at the Villa Maria aged care facility in Bundoora on Monday. Key points:Two residents at aged care facilities in Caulfield and Camberwell have tested positive to coronavirusVilla Maria aged care went into lockdown on Monday after a resident there became a suspected coronavirus caseMiCare's aged care facility at Kilsyth has also entered lockdown as it awaits test results for two residents with flu-like symptomsDeputy Chief Health Officer Annaliese van Diemen said seven new cases of the virus had been recorded in the state since Monday, including two in separate aged care homes. Dr van Diemen said one of the aged care cases was a resident at Lynden Aged Care in Camberwell in Melbourne's east. "The resident is being treated in isolation in a metropolitan hospital," Dr van Diemen said. "Residents and families have been informed by the facility."She said cleaning and contact tracing was already underway. The second case at an aged care facility was a resident at HammondCare's dementia care facility in Caulfield, she said. "A subsequent test has come back negative for that case but we treat all positive cases as positive cases and we don't take any chances," she said. Both aged care facilities will remain closed to visitors for 14 days as a precaution. "At this point in time we don't have a source for the infections at the current facilities so that's why the extensive investigations will continue in the coming days," Dr van Diemen said. Meanwhile, aged care facilities at Kilsyth in Melbourne's east have entered lockdown while they await coronavirus test results for two residents suffering flu-like symptoms. In a statement, MiCare said one resident of its Margriet Manor facility and another at its neighbouring facility Overbeek Lodge were being given special care in isolation while they awaited test results. MiCare said it had tested about a dozen residents for COVID-19 since the pandemic began and all results to date had been negative. The total number of coronavirus cases in Victoria now stands at 1,573, a net increase of six after a previous case was removed due to "reclassification". A statement from the Chief Health Officer said one new case was linked the Cedar Meats outbreak, bringing the total for that cluster to 100, including 64 staff and 36 close contacts. One new case was a returned traveller in hotel quarantine, while three more were under investigation. There were no further cases linked to the McDonald's Fawkner outbreak, with the total number of cases in that cluster remaining at 12. HammondCare senior nurse Angela Raguz said in a statement earlier that further testing was underway and the facility had been placed into lockdown. "HammondCare is treating the result as if it is positive and taking all precautions," Ms Raguz said. She said the resident who tested positive for coronavirus lived in the same cottage as 11 other residents. HammondCare had deployed its outbreak management plan which included additional staff resources and was working closely with the Victorian Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), she said. "Our plan is that there will be information available to families at any time, day or night," Ms Raguz said. "As residents of this home may live with dementia we are especially mindful of their specific needs in what is a challenging time for all residents and staff."Villa Maria aged care in Bundoora went into lockdown after a resident there became a suspected coronavirus case over the weekend. Health authorities initially said the resident was one of Monday's new coronavirus cases but later said the resident had returned an "inconclusive" result that was being treated as positive as a precaution. The home's operator, Villa Maria Catholic Homes (VMCH), said on Monday the entire home was in lockdown as a result and the resident, who had no symptoms, was quarantined in their room. McDonald's distribution centre cleaned following delivery driver's positive testA McDonald's distribution centre in Melbourne has also been closed as a precaution after a delivery driver tested positive for coronavirus. A dozen McDonald's restaurants across Melbourne's north and west closed on Monday due to the positive case, with hundreds of staff asked to self-isolate. A McDonald's Australia spokesman said the company closed the distribution centre last night to conduct a deep clean. He said it was a precautionary measure only and the distribution centre was scheduled to re-open on Tuesday. State Government support for university sector announcedEarlier, the State Government announced a support package for Victoria's university sector, which is struggling to stay afloat during the coronavirus pandemic. Minister for Higher Education Gayle Tierney said the State Government had created the Victorian Higher Education State Investment Fund to supply $350 million for capital works, research, and industry partnerships for universities. Works will focus on new technology and infrastructure that enables universities to conduct new research, commercialise intellectual property and create high-value jobs. The Government is also offering universities payroll tax deferrals valued at about $110 million, providing immediate relief for universities dealing with a shortfall in funds from the downturn of international student enrolments and other revenue loss as a result of coronavirus. Victorian Government announces $350 million for universities to keep staff employed and find new financial opportunitiesMs Tierney said the fund would "help reduce the number of job losses" in the sector due to COVID-19, but was "not the solution". She said the Federal Government was responsible for funding universities but was "clearly" not doing enough to help the sector. "We would like to see them step up and produce more, because here even in Victoria, we have something like 38,000 people employed in the university sector, we want them to be able to keep their job we want to be able to provide a thriving sector," she said. Treasurer Tim Pallas said the Government had spoken to vice-chancellors about the "profound" challenges they were facing. "It's critically important that we understand universities educate future leaders of society and they also help us conduct critical research and ensure we expand our knowledge base and make our lives that much better," Mr Pallas said. But he also said the Federal Government needed to "do more" to help higher education. "The JobKeeper fund does appear to be substantially overfunded for the demand it is currently getting," he said. "The Commonwealth could do more in this space and it's vitally important we all do as much as we can. "We do need the Commonwealth to do more for this sector, it is hurting and it hurting quite profoundly and will have a dramatic impact upon the long term economic vitality of the state and the nation, on the competitiveness of the nation."The Federal Government has so far committed to allowing universities to keep $18 billion in funding budgeted for domestic students, regardless of any drop in enrolments. It has also offered $100 million in regulatory relief for education providers, but denied the sector's requests for easier access to the JobKeeper scheme and support payments to international students.
Coronavirus puppy scams rise sharply as empty-handed Australians lose $300,000
If a cute puppy offered online sounds too good to be true, it probably is. Key points:Australians have lost almost $300,000 to puppy scams during the pandemicThe ACCC says online fraudsters offer dogs that don't exist for saleCavoodles and French Bulldogs were the most common breeds in the scamsThat is the message from the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC), which estimates that Australians have lost almost $300,000 to puppy scams during the coronavirus pandemic. Compared to the previous year, Scamwatch recorded a fivefold increase in April for dishonest schemes to extort money out of consumers for dogs that did not exist. "Loneliness was the most widely reported source of personal stress in Australia during April, and in April was when we saw this huge spike in puppy scams," said ACCC Deputy Chair Delia Rickard. How to suss out a puppy scamDo a reverse-image Google search to check if the photo has been posted elsewhere on the internet. Some scammers get around this by altering the imageDo an online search of the seller's email address, which may bring up warnings on other sitesCheck for membership numbers from breeder associationsCheck out the seller's previous web presenceTry to meet the breeder in person and meet the adult dogs"Unfortunately, the rush to get a new pet and the unusual circumstances of COVID-19 makes it harder to work out what's real or a scam."Ms Rickard said Cavoodles and French Bulldogs were the most common breeds reported in the scams. She urged Australians to reverse image search pictures of the puppies and to put the exact words of the advertisement into a search engine before purchasing any dog online to ensure authenticity. Consumers can also check for membership numbers from breeder associations and look back at the seller's previous web presence. Ms Rickard said that while lonely Australians had long been vulnerable to rackets that preyed on their love of animals, their judgement had been further impaired by the enforced isolation of a pandemic. Victorians were the most likely to fall for puppy scams, spending around $115,000, followed by NSW residents who lost almost $98,000. South Australians were the least likely to succumb to the deception of online tricksters. But it is not just Australians who are succumbing to floppy ears and doe eyes, with the UK, US, Canada and South Africa also reporting a spike in canine fraud cases. Space to play or pause, M to mute, left and right arrows to seek, up and down arrows for volume. WATCHDuration: 9 seconds9sPuppy video used in online scam in Melbourne"It's quite an international scam that has been going for a long time," Ms Rickard said. "I guess there's something that just tugs on everyone's heartstrings when they see cute, adorable puppies."But it is more than just potential pet purchases that have seen Australians fleeced since the coronavirus outbreak prompted strict quarantine measures enforced two months ago. How fast is coronavirus growing around the world?Charted growth in key countries, on a logarithmic scale. This chart uses a logarithmic scale to highlight coronavirus growth rates. Read our explainer to understand what that means — and how COVID-19 cases are spreading around the world. As of April, Scamwatch had received more than 2,500 reports of fraud incidents relating to COVID-19, with consumers losing nearly $750,000. Australians have so far lost more than $53 million to all reported scams this year. Delia Rickard of the ACCCACCC's Delia Rickard says consumers' best judgement is sometimes forgotten in the rush for companionship during COVID-19.(Supplied: ACCC)"It's only a small percentage of the scammers that are actually reported to us, so you could multiply that many times to get the true figure," Ms Rickard said. Ms Rickard advised consumers to be sceptical and cynical to avoid being scammed, especially when it came to the online purchase of a furry isolation companion. "Ask yourself: if something's too good to be true, that might be an indication that it's a scam," she said.
Coronavirus patients with even mild cases of COVID-19 are taking months to recover and suffering extreme fatigue
As a professor of infectious diseases at Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Paul Garner is well qualified to talk about disease. Key points:Many patients who contract COVID-19 are experiencing effects for many weeksSome are complaining of severe fatigueSt Vincent's Hospital in Sydney is undertaking a 12-month study into the effects of the virusHe also has COVID-19. "It's the worst illness I've ever had," he told 7.30. "I've had dengue. I've had malaria. I've never been as ill as this and it's been really frightening because it's so unpredictable."He is on day 59 since being diagnosed. "The disease comes at you when you least expect it," he said. "You feel quite well and then suddenly in the afternoon it slaps you round the head like a cricket bat. "The length of the illness completely floored me. "You just pray every day that it will go away."Professor Garner is still dealing with exhaustion. "It gives you some of the symptoms that are very similar to chronic fatigue but I am hesitant about calling it that," he said. "If we call it COVID fatigue we know where we are. "I have sympathy for people with chronic fatigue syndrome now, and I believe this disease fast-tracks you into experiencing these symptoms."Professor Garner is just one of thousands discovering how tiring COVID-19 can be. Scientists are still uncovering the deadly secrets of the virus and the long-term impact for those who recover from the disease is yet to be fully understood. In serious cases there are concerns about major organ damage. The World Health Organisation states those with less severe cases of COVID-19 should recover within two weeks, and serious cases could take up to six weeks. But even patients with what are considered mild bouts of the virus, are experiencing fatigue and breathlessness well beyond the suggested recovery period. At Sydney's St Vincent's Hospital, it is hoped a year-long study that is getting underway will provide some answers. A key investigator on the St Vincent's Hospital study is infectious diseases physician, Professor Greg Dore. "What we're interested in is looking at any effects of COVID-19," he told 7.30. "It has a broad spectrum of acute illness from relatively mild upper respiratory type infection symptoms to very severe pneumonia and other organ effects. "We're interested in even the milder cases, whether there is an ongoing effect on people's health, what we call a post viral fatigue; effects on people's exercise tolerance, on neuro-cognitive function, so ability to concentrate. "We know that you can get post viral fatigue with other viruses and glandular fever is probably the classic one, but Ross River fever and other viral illnesses are well known to cause viral fatigue."'How long will it take to recover?'One of the patients taking part in the study is Alex Lewis, who 7.30 met in mid March, shortly after she tested positive for COVID-19. Two months later, she is still struggling. "I was quite fit before but now I don't feel the same way," she told 7.30. "My breathing has continued to get worse and exercise is quite difficult. "And it takes me, I reckon, double the amount of time to recover. "My fatigue, it comes and goes a bit."She is keen to know how long it will take to shake the infection. "We still don't have any definitive answer … I'm quite interested to find out from the study if there is anything more we can know about that," Ms Lewis said. 'A very long recovery'US writer Fiona Lowenstein was diagnosed with COVID-19 in mid-March and is bewildered and anxious about how long her symptoms have lasted. "It's been a very long recovery process and very different from what I expected," she told 7.30. She couldn't find any information about what to expect, so she started a support group, which now has thousands of members around the world. Many have had the same experience as her, feeling weary and unwell long after they thought they'd be better. "I thought I had fully recovered a couple of weeks ago, then I relapsed into some old symptoms, chills and sweats. And this intense feeling of fatigue," she said. "It almost feels like I've been hit by a truck at 4:00pm each day. "It became clear to me that there needed to be a base or community for people suffering from this virus where we could talk through everything. "My inbox was flooded."Ms Lowenstein has now been contacted by thousands of COVID-19 patients from around the world, experiencing similar symptoms to her.
How Relationships Australia's Elisabeth Shaw handles tension at home during the coronavirus pandemic
Like a lot of people, Elisabeth Shaw, Chief Executive of Relationships Australia New South Wales, is still trying to figure out how to work effectively while stuck at home. Even for someone who works in the field of relationship counselling, it's no easy task. "This is the problem with being home with the whole family is that I'm trying to find a place where they're not," she says. The last few months have been just as tough for many other people. "Those nearest and dearest to us need to survive this with us," Ms Shaw says. "We don't want people's negative situations to escalate at these times... And so we have to be very careful with each other getting through this. "We want to all be left standing and still be in connection when we get to go back to our normal lives."As a clinical and counselling psychologist who works to enhance relationships within families and their communities, Ms Shaw believes quality relationships are going to be more important now than ever. And she has some suggestions on how we can all continue living and working at home when things get tense. Talking with each otherWith people suddenly forced to spend days or weeks cooped up at home together, it can seem like a challenge to even go the distance without an argument. Listen to the Pineapple ProjectJoin Jan Fran as she explores how to find community and connection amidst coronavirus. A starting point is to work with your strengths, and to acknowledge that coronavirus has disrupted how the household normally works. "If you and your housemates or your partner or your kids don't really talk on an emotional level, absolutely declare it upfront," she says. "If you say, 'Look, I know this feels a bit clunky, but I really want to talk about how I'm feeling.' Then usually everyone relaxes. They could laugh with you, and it's a warm way to be able to talk about some new things in new ways."To get the ball rolling, Ms Shaw says it can help to identify and talk about your own flaws first. "Own your own stuff. Be accountable for what's happening to you. Don't get fixated on why other people are annoying," she says. "Start to look at why you're annoyed and how you might be able to defuse that bomb without waiting for others to change first. "And when you speak about it, say 'Look, I've been irritable this week and I don't think I've handled myself that well at times and I've been reflecting on that.'"That can be a good way to lead by example. If you own your stuff other people might say 'Well look, now you mentioned it I didn't handle it well either.'"In her own life, Ms Shaw finds the end of the day can be the best time to talk, usually on the nightly dog walk. But it's best to pick a time that's not too late, or when everyone is not tired. "I have to find the sweet spot between family members being a bit chilled, and not yet tipped over into exhaustion," she says. "As a mum, I know from a lot of experience that I have a lot of influence (more than I'd like) on the family's mood and resilience. "Many women I speak to agree that they play this role. It can be quite stressful, as it's not always easy to keep it together. "However when I am acting out, and I see the effect on others, I realise I need to pull my head in first, and even agree out loud that I probably started the waterfall of trouble."But it is also worth remembering we can't assume that we'll just remain emotionally even throughout this crisis, Ms Shaw says. "We've got to be tolerant of our own mood changes. It may be from moment to moment, day to day, week to week," she says. "But equally, we have to be aware that everyone we live with is also having those mood changes."A household planAs a way to spark a productive group conversation, Ms Shaw recommends that people develop a household continuity plan to help discuss any problems. "Be proactive," she says. "Call a family meeting or a household meeting and say 'Look let's just draw a line in the sand and review how we've been trapped and what's worked, what's gone a bit pear-shaped.'"The meeting, Ms Shaw says, is an opportunity to name the problems and brainstorm some options. And it should be something that happens once a week or so, to refine the approach. "If you're not proactive now about some of the repeating themes that are already happening, they're only going to keep repeating until they're addressed. At the end of the day, Ms Shaw says it's about being able to work through problems and talk them out. "But the message in all of this is that silence rarely works."
Amalgamation talk begins again as coronavirus hits Tasmanian council coffers hard
When coronavirus hit Tasmania's communities, councils across the state rushed to help by freezing rates and cutting fees but, with coffers bare and staff stood down, it is becoming clear many councils will be the ones in need of aid. Key points:Tasmania's councils have frozen rates and created hardship packages, but it's meant a huge hit to their bottom lineMany councils are worried about how they'll pay staff and fund servicesThe financial situation has renewed calls for the State Government to reconsider its position on council amalgamationsTheir financial stress has seen renewed calls for the State Government to ditch its policy of voluntary amalgamations and finally force some councils to merge. It was mid-April when Premier Peter Gutwein and Local Government Minister Mark Shelton wrote to councils urging them "to do more". "We strongly encourage all councils to consider their individual packages and provide support to their community as a matter of urgency," they wrote. "It is vital that all councils agree to measures including rate increase freezes and generous hardship policies."The state's councils agreed to implement hardship packages — including delaying rates collections and waiving or deferring fees — and freeze rates for the 20/21 financial year. But not all councils could afford this or agreed with the rates freeze, with some mayors saying they felt forced into doing so. For Flinders Island Council, the rates freeze is putting some serious pressure on its finances. "To all councils [the freeze] is probably a big issue, a big burden. To us, it's just off the planet," Mayor Annie Revie said. The council has been in "a high-risk category financially" since 2018 and entered into the crisis with about $2 million in debt. The extra hit means the council may be forced to sacrifice some services. "It's something we're going to have to look at. We're going to have to involve our community in what sort of services can we afford," she said. This will be a question many councils across the state will now face and, depending on the council, the loss of services could range from a pause on council-supported events and grants to delays on infrastructure upgrades and slower reparation of things like roads and street lamps. On paper, councils are asset-rich — they own parks, roads and buildings — but few of them can be sold or, as Derwent Valley Mayor Ben Shaw put it, "you can't sell a footpath". Derwent Valley Council has about $800,000 in outstanding rates for this financial year and as part of the agreed-upon hardship package, they won't be chasing them. Cr Shaw said with the council's cash flow in "disarray" he was worried about paying staff leave entitlements. "We're around about the $1 million mark [in leave entitlements] on our books, which is a real concern. We need to have that cash available plus we need to have operation cash as well," he said. He does not know how they will keep the hardship package and implement a freeze on rates. "If it all comes in and all our rates come in, we'll be fine," he said. "It's the fact that there's no incentive for anybody for this next 12 months to pay their rates because we won't be chasing them and there's no interest accrual on them. "If everybody decides not to pay their rates, we will run out of cash."In contrast, the New South Wales State Government has moved to allow councils to increase rates to protect them from a downturn during the coronavirus crisis, a move applauded by the business community. The predominantly council-owned body TasWater has also had to freeze rates, meaning it has not paid the councils dividends for the past six months and is unlikely to pay any next financial year — money many of the smaller councils rely on. But it's not just regional councils that are struggling. Hobart City Council has estimated that by the end of the financial year it will be down $10 million in revenue and next financial year, the worst case scenario will see it down $22 million. "We have similar challenges that most capital cities have because we all have a greater percentage of the hotels, hospitality and retail ratepayers and they're the ones that are struggling and asking for assistance," said Lord Mayor Anna Reynolds. The council has borrowed $20 million for operational purposes, including paying their staff. "Not getting access to JobKeeper was a significant blow to us, but also to local governments right around the country," said Cr Reynolds. While it initially paid all staff, Hobart's council has been forced to stand some of them down and next year's budget is likely to be more about maintenance than new projects. "We just have to make sure that we've got enough money to maintain what we have; that means there'll be less money for either new initiatives, new infrastructure or potentially some of those special festivals and events that the City of Hobart has been able to support in the past," she said. Amalgamation talk returnsTasmanian Chamber of Commerce and Industry chief executive Michael Bailey said with councils' finances in trouble, it is time the State Government reconsidered its policy on council amalgamations. "We've reached the stage where there are several councils across Tasmania who are really going to struggle to make it work, even in the medium term," he said. "It seems that amalgamating is the only way that we're going to get sensible local government in these areas."The financial case, for at least some mergers, has already been made. Tasmania has 29 councils for a population of just over 520,000 — by comparison Brisbane has one council for a population of 2.5 million. Feasibility studies commissioned in 2015 by then-local government minister Peter Gutwein found merging the four Greater Hobart councils — Hobart, Kingborough, Glenorchy and Clarence — would save $19 million per year. The creation of a great south-eastern council — which would include Clarence, Tasman, Sorell and Glamorgan Spring Bay — would save $7.6 million per year. The Government has shown a reluctance to force amalgamations, but Mr Bailey said that reform is now urgent. "What we'll see here, if we're not careful, are councils not exactly amalgamating, but almost bankrupting," he said. "Rather than neighbouring councils standing around waiting for the keys to be handed to them, what I'd prefer to see is a more strategic approach.""It makes a lot more sense for there to be strategy leading into these sorts of things rather than a collapse of a council, which I think we could genuinely be seeing in a couple of council areas across the state."But Cr Revie said she was "adamantly" against it. "We're short of money, but I believe that council in a small place like this means much more than money."In a statement, Local Government Minister Mark Shelton said the Government's position has not changed and "significant local government reforms stand the best chance of succeeding when processes are voluntary". "Councils are well-equipped to make decisions regarding how they respond to and recover from the economic effects of the coronavirus pandemic and if councils determine this should include conversations on amalgamation, then the Government will work with them on their ideas," he said.
Australia's sporting codes may face scheduling headache following coronavirus shutdown
Had you suggested a month ago that there could be too much live sport this year, it would have been assumed your COVID-19 swab had penetrated the naval cavity and become lodged in your cerebral cortex. That was back when the forecasts of any sport being played before Christmas seemed bleak and some of us ridiculed Australian Rugby League Commission chairman Peter V'landys for his preposterous insistence his competition would start on May 28. Now, in just nine days, elated fans will howl at their televisions that "one ref is still one too many!" as Pugnacious Pete's NRL leads sport back onto the field — that is, if you don't count horse racing as a sport, which many don't until the spring or autumn carnivals when, suddenly, they do. Two weeks later, the AFL will return when most anticipate Victorian giants Richmond and Collingwood will be given the honour of playing the first match, something that would no doubt thrill already disgruntled fans from Western Australia and South Australia, whose teams will be hunkered down in Queensland hubs. Then the (not so) Super Rugby could be back in early July, the A-League season completed by August (and presumably started again in October), Super Netball might be rebooted and various international events, including the golf and tennis majors (except the Open Championship and Wimbledon), could have confirmed their current tentative bookings. Most likely, there will be no crowds. But by August we will be as accustomed to watching matches played in eerily empty stadiums as we have become to having them drowned out by hysterical commentators. Which leads to the very welcome but unforeseen problem created by the requisite scheduling adjustments, a period that would challenge Roy Slaven and HG Nelson's oft-repeated rule of thumb: too much sport is barely enough. By extending the NRL and AFL seasons, we have notionally created an Octoberfest of sport where the footy finals will collide with the spring racing carnival and potentially the men's ICC T20 World Cup, as well as several other global events. The AFL grand final may share October 24 with the 100th running of the Cox Plate, while on November 11 the Nine Network is scheduled to broadcast rugby league's second State of Origin encounter and a T20 World Cup semi-final, potentially featuring Australia. The second clash of events appears the least likely, given the increasing murmurs the T20 World Cup will be postponed until February or — given there is another T20 World Cup in India late next year — abandoned, especially with the Indian Premier League's operators eyeing the October/November period covetously. The AFL won't be seen to publicly death-ride the big cricket circus, given it needs to negotiate with Cricket Australia over ground access for state and community cricket. But, privately, AFL officials are hoping the T20 World Cup is at least shifted because of the potential clashes over ground availability, most obviously the MCG on grand final day. Although, assuming crowds are still not permitted in late October, the AFL's showpiece might be better accommodated as a purely TV product at the Docklands stadium or even — shock, horror! — a non-Victorian ground, given the cavernous MCG was the least atmospheric venue during the crowd-less opening round. Racing among scheduling logjamHorse racing has notionally been the one remaining attraction for sports fans in lockdown. Even if, for some of us, watching Michael Jordan reminisce about great games and even greater grudges has been a more entertaining distraction than a midweek maiden from Hawkesbury. But having been the only show in town during what is normally its downtime, horse racing will have the NRL and AFL for company during its spring carnival unless it adopts the most imaginative course and avoids the clash by moving to November. The Melbourne Cup winner is on the fence, as two horses outside it bump each other near the finish. There are no plans to move the Melbourne Cup away from the first Tuesday in November.(AAP: Michael Dodge)The suggestion the Melbourne Cup could be run on anything other than the first Tuesday in November was immediately shot down by Victoria Racing Club chief executive Neil Wilson. "Cup week is Cup week," said Wilson, adopting the kind of literalist approach to scheduling that seems to assume COVID-19 has hitherto undiagnosed respect for racing tradition. Meanwhile, the Melbourne Racing Club and Moonee Valley Racing Club are at least considering the idea of shifting the Caulfield Cup and Cox Plate respectively to November to avoid Saturday clashes with football finals. This could raise the novel problem for punters of lining up how Melbourne Cup form translates to the Caulfield Cup and the Cox Plate rather than the other way around, albeit without the annual mystery of rating international horses with exotic form over seemingly random distances. This also raises the question of why three separate clubs are required to run Melbourne racing, although it would take more than a global pandemic to modernise Australian racing's arcane governance model. At the local level, the idea of any sport being contested remains problematic, with some confusion about the application of the Australian Institute of Sport's three-staged Framework for Rebooting Sport. As the weeks tick by, various local football codes continue to weigh up the cost-effectiveness of returning to the park, while coaches of junior teams are increasingly eager to get kids kicking a ball. But while we are waiting to play sport, the scheduling jam confronting various administrations could create a wonderfully unexpected problem for viewers. A period starting in usually barren October when, as Roy and HG might say: too much sport will be bloody great!
Chinese President Xi Jinping defends coronavirus response, backs WHO-led investigation
Chinese President Xi Jinping has defended China's handling of the coronavirus outbreak, saying his country will support a "comprehensive" World Health Organization-led review into the global response after the virus is brought under control. Key points:Chinese President Xi Jinping says his country has acted with "openness and transparency" throughout the coronavirus outbreakMr Xi said China would support a WHO-led investigation into the pandemicAustralia is expected to back a draft resolution from the EU calling for an independent inquiryMr Xi told the World Health Assembly in Geneva that China had been open and transparent about the coronavirus outbreak, which started in Hubei province in late 2019, and said his country would support an investigation "conducted in an objective and impartial way". "This work needs a scientific and professional attitude, and needs to be led by the WHO," Mr Xi told the assembly via a video message. "And the principles of objectivity and fairness need to be upheld."His comments came as the US blasted the WHO's response to the pandemic and took a thinly-veiled swipe at China for an "apparent attempt to conceal" the initial outbreak, and WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus signalled an independent review would begin as soon as possible. China will also provide $US2 billion ($3.1b) over two years towards helping with the COVID-19 response, and Mr Xi promised any vaccine developed by his country would be made a global public good. Mr Xi did not indicate whether China would vote for a joint resolution by Australia and other countries calling for an independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus pandemic. He described the pandemic as the "most serious global public health emergency" since World War II and defended his country's handling of the crisis, which has come under fierce criticism from the United States and President Donald Trump. "All along we have acted with openness and transparency and responsibility," Mr Xi said. "We have turned the tide on the virus". The World Health Assembly is the annual meeting in Geneva of all 194 members of the World Health Organization, but due to coronavirus this year's assembly is being held online. US blasts WHO response, takes swipe at ChinaLast month, Mr Trump accused the WHO of being a "pipe organ for China" and on Monday his health secretary continued the attack. Without mentioning China by name, Health Secretary Alex Azar made it clear Washington considered the WHO jointly responsible. "We must be frank about one of the primary reasons this outbreak spun out of control," Mr Azar said. "There was a failure by this organisation to obtain the information that the world needed, and that failure cost many lives.""We saw that WHO failed at its core mission of information sharing and transparency when member states do not act in good faith. "This cannot ever happen again."Dr Tedros, who defended the organisation's alerts, said "WHO sounded the alarm early, and we sounded it often". When the WHO declared a global emergency on January 30, he said, there were fewer than 100 cases outside China, and no deaths. Push for independent coronavirus inquiryAustralia is one of almost 120 WHO member nations backing a European Union draft motion calling for "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of the "international health response to COVID-19". Australian Health Minister Greg Hunt delivered an address on Monday backing the EU resolution and outlined Australia's response to the crisis. "We are pleased to have support for an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation of the global response," Mr Hunt said. "We need to learn the lessons from this pandemic and ensure we have the strongest possible global health architecture, with an enhanced ability to prevent and respond to future outbreaks."Australia was the first nation after the US to call for an independent probe, including into the initial handling of the outbreak in Hubei, drawing angry protests from China. But since then, it has toned down some of its demands, while working to both toughen up — and gather support for — the EU motion. Dr Tedros, who has always promised a review, told the forum it would come "at the earliest appropriate moment" and make recommendations for the future. He received robust backing from the WHO's independent oversight panel. "Every country and every organisation must examine its response and learn from its experience," he said, adding that the review must cover "all actors in good faith". The EU resolution is expected to be debated and adopted on Tuesday.
States under pressure to reopen borders closed in a bid to contain coronavirus
National Cabinet's key health advisory committee has confirmed it never recommended internal border closures, as states and territories come under pressure to lift their restrictions and once again allow travel within Australia. Key points:National Cabinet's key health committee has never recommended state borders close to contain coronavirusA former Health Department boss says economies can't function properly while borders remain closedThe Queensland Premier is warning her state's border might be closed until SeptemberQueensland, Western Australia, South Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory all closed their borders at the height of the coronavirus crisis, either banning non-residents from entering or requiring travellers to self-quarantine for a fortnight. But as the nation begins its three-stage process of easing COVID-19 restrictions, the state of the borders remains one of the most contentious issues. Prime Minister Scott Morrison has previously said he hoped Australians could travel interstate in time for the July school holidays, but New South Wales Premier Gladys Berejiklian is urging her counterparts to "get those borders open as soon as possible". Federal Deputy Chief Medical Officer Paul Kelly said the decision to close state borders was not based on any health advice given to the National Cabinet and suggested that as the number of cases continues to fall, leaders might reconsider the measure. "At the national level, we've never suggested that internal borders within Australia should be closed," he said. "But, if you look at when those decisions were made some weeks ago, we had a rapidly increasing number of cases each day right around Australia but particularly in the south-eastern corner of the nation. "And so, when you look at what's happening now with just very few cases, only just over 100 cases in the last week and only 11 in the last 24 hours, I think that things have changed a lot."When asked about those comments on Monday, Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk stood firm, suggesting there might be no change before September, four months away. "There is still community transmission in Victoria and in New South Wales," she told ABC News Breakfast. "So as soon as my Chief Health Officer says that I can relax those restrictions, we absolutely will."Ms Palaszczuk suggested a "travel bubble" might be possible between the states that had closed their borders before they are opened to New South Wales and Victoria. However Federal Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham suggested such action could be costly and states that remain shut will need to compensate tourism businesses. "If the successful suppression of COVID-19 continues then the states should be relaxing their border controls," Senator Birmingham said. "If one or two states were to hold out then they will be answerable to their tourism industry and will ultimately need to provide additional support to that industry."Former Health Department secretary Jane Halton also questioned the need to keep internal borders closed, saying Australia's economy "doesn't work in hermetically sealed spheres". A member of the Federal Government's COVID-19 Co-ordination Commission, Ms Halton said she did not believe it was an effective way of controlling the spread of the virus. "I'm personally not convinced that our internal borders are the right way to manage our risks," she told the National Press Club. "I understand why people are nervous, but I would encourage people to think about how we maintain control, perhaps while enabling business to operate."In Western Australia, which has long joked about seceding from the rest of the nation, there is strong public support for the state's hard border, meaning it will likely be among the last restrictions eased in that state. As of Monday, WA had recorded 554 coronavirus cases, compared to 1,055 in Queensland, 1,558 in Victoria and 3,075 in New South Wales. In another sign of the country's progress in suppressing COVID-19, the National Cabinet is not due to meet for another week while the daily briefing given by the Chief Medical Officer or deputy chief medical officers is being reduced to three times a week.
Are we headed for a cashless economy post-coronavirus?
If you got the feeling cash was slowly disappearing from our daily transactions even before coronavirus hit, you were right. Key points:Cash is sometimes required in cases of financial abuse, one of the most common forms of domestic violence, with perpetrators controlling family financesThe homeless are also disadvantaged by a cashless society with people having issues with connectivityRecent research revealed 92 per cent of seniors use the internet, with 57 per cent using it for bankingAccording to the Reserve Bank's 2019 Consumer Payments Survey, Australians are increasingly preferring to use electronic payment methods — with just 27 per cent of all consumer payments made with cash, compared with 37 per cent in 2016, and 69 per cent in 2007. Within a matter of days of COVID-19 cases being diagnosed in Australia, cash suddenly became unacceptable currency in the few businesses that remained open under the newly instituted, socially isolating restrictions. So what has the decline of cash meant for people who rely on physical dollars and cents — everyone from parents handing over pocket money to more vulnerable members of the community such as seniors, the homeless, and people fleeing domestic violence?How Australians pay for goods and services: consumer survey resultsCash needed for survivalIn many cases, cash is a necessary means of survival, especially for victims of domestic violence. Financial abuse is one of the most common forms of domestic violence. Perpetrators controlling the family finances can make it difficult for victims to leave and seek refuge by limiting access to accounts, credit and debit cards, or only providing a weekly cash amount for shopping and expenses. "Most of the women that we work with would approach us and say they actually have very few resources, and that he controls everything. Property and other assets might be in his name or controlled by him," said the CEO of Bendigo's Centre for Non-Violence, Margaret Augerinos. "They may not have access to credit cards or any other banking opportunities, so that is a very common story."However, Ms Augerinos said essential crisis payments and financial support for victims of domestic violence arrive through electronic transactions. Setting up new accounts and financial planning is something domestic service support services help provide. Difficulty accessing the digital worldThe other group of vulnerable people disadvantaged by a cashless society are the homeless. Some partake in street begging to top up government support payments which are received digitally through online accounts. While many are quite "tech savvy" in terms of being able to access different technologies as payment, according to the chief operating officer for homeless and low-income support service Haven Home Safe, Trudi Ray, accessibility to the digital world can be problematic. "What we will be seeing is people having issues with connectivity, with being able to access the internet — and therefore their funds — which is certainly a concern," she said. With many of the local organisations that support people with digital access closed at the moment, there will be an impact. "We've been making sure that we are aware of where the free wi-fi hot spots are around the different municipalities, and we're able to send people to those locations if they do run out of data," Ms Ray said. "We've also talked to Telstra about some other options available to our clients, and we do offer cards that have credit to ensure their technology needs are supported."Second wave of seniors going onlineThere has been a significant uptake of technology by older Australians, which means switching from cash to cards and online banking during the pandemic has made less of an impact. Recent research from RMIT University revealed 92 per cent of seniors use the internet, with 77 per cent using it to find information and 57 per cent using it for banking. Life under a pandemic has meant use of the internet amongst seniors has increased to include social media and applications such as Zoom, Microsoft Teams, and Skype. Where once those platforms and applications were previously perceived as barriers, this is no longer the case. "[Previously seniors said] 'I'm not comfortable, I don't have the skills, I don't know how to do this'. But now that it is a necessity to stay in touch, we see that they have been able to overcome these barriers," said Dr Torgeir Aleti from RMIT University's School of Economics, Finance and Marketing. He believes we are seeing a second wave of seniors online and participating in a whole range of activities. 'Tricky time for the tooth fairy'At the other end of the age scale, earning pocket money from chores around the home and the loss of a tooth or two is a rite of passage for most children. But spending their small fortunes has gotten a little harder today. "With many families spending more time at home, parents might be using pocket money to motivate children to take on jobs around the house," said Professor Julie Green, executive director at online parenting organisation Raising Children. "In the current situation with many shops preferring cashless transactions, parents could think about substituting pocket money using coins and notes for other items such as tokens, or perhaps notes with the value of the pocket money written on them," she said. "These could then be exchanged when children have reached a saving goal or would like to spend their money. "It's a tricky time for the tooth fairy with coins not being widely accepted at the moment."Professor Green suggested parents could consider providing a little gift instead of cash when a child loses a tooth.
Electricity bill shock in store as coronavirus and cold weather bites
With all six family members of Amy Pytchin's family working and learning from her Dubbo home due to coronavirus restrictions, electricity consumption has gone through the roof. Key points:One electricity retailer says consumption is up by 40 per cent this monthMany retailers have stopped reading meters in personWith family members working from home and homeschooling, bills have soared"We're definitely expecting our next bill to be higher than usual," Ms Pychtin said. "We're running multiple computers, devices and chargers all at once. "We're trying to switch off lights and open blinds, and put on jumpers instead of heaters."Put a jumper on, nowEnergy retail boss Domenic Capomolla said the Pychtins were not alone. He estimated households were consuming 40 per cent more electricity each day than was typical for this time of year. "This May has had a colder start and there have been a lot of people at home that wouldn't normally be using heating and appliances all day long," Mr Capomolla, chief executive of Tango Energy, said. Mr Capomolla said households needed to curb usage now to avoid bill shock. "The spike in usage incredible even when you account for seasonality."Discounts helpPreparing for quarterly power bills is crucial for Steven Cassell, from Molong. The disability pensioner and his wife spend much of their time at home. Each fortnight Mr Cassell pays $150 to his electricity retailer so his account is always in credit. When his bill arrives, he pays the outstanding amount immediately and is rewarded with a 30 per cent discount. "We can't let our bills get out of control and this works really well for us."Beware of estimatesDue to social distancing requirements, many electricity retailers have stopped reading meters in person, instead, opting to estimate customers' usage based on past consumption patterns. Tambar Springs farmers Grahame and Noni Pryor urged others not to "blindly" pay bills based on estimates. "Estimates can result in stupidly high consumption figures — in our experience — 20 to 30 per cent over what you've actually used," Mrs Pryor said. Mrs Pryor said consumers should photograph their own metres where it's not possible for the retailer to do so. "It's frustrating having to phone the retailers and correct the bill but you shouldn't let anyone charge you for a good or service that you simply didn't receive," she said.
Coronavirus lockdown at Melbourne's Villa Maria aged care in Bundoora, a dozen McDonald's outlets shut
A Melbourne aged care home is in lockdown and all workers and staff will be tested for coronavirus after a resident there became a suspected coronavirus case over the weekend. Key points:Health authorities initially said the resident at the Villa Maria aged care home in Bundoora was one of Monday's new coronavirus casesThey later said the resident had returned an "inconclusive" result, but that the result was treated as positive as a precautionAll staff and residents at the home will be tested for coronavirus over the next few daysVictorian health authorities said on Monday afternoon a resident at the Villa Maria aged care facility in Bundoora was among eight new Victorian coronavirus cases. But the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) later clarified that the resident had returned an "inconclusive" test, which was being treated as positive under the health unit's policy. "This is a precautionary approach designed to minimise potential spread as quickly as possible," the statement said. "Because of the high-risk setting, the aged care facility will continue to be managed as if it were an outbreak site for at least two weeks."The ABC has asked the DHHS whether cases where people return "inconclusive" results are routinely added to the tally of coronavirus cases in Victoria. The home's operator, Villa Maria Catholic Homes (VMCH), said the entire home was in lockdown as a result and the resident, who had no symptoms, was quarantined in their room. Over the weekend, the resident was taken to hospital with a temperature of 39 degrees Celsius before returning the inconclusive test, which had since been followed by a negative test, VMCH said in a statement. "Staff who have had close contact with the person are in self-isolation at home. All other staff are being tested for COVID-19," the statement said. "Should any signs of ill health appear, we will seek medical attention immediately."It comes as a dozen McDonald's restaurants across Melbourne's north and west have been closed and hundreds of workers asked to self-isolate after a delivery driver tested positive for coronavirus. Health authorities believe the driver was a close contact of an employee at the Craigieburn McDonald's who tested positive last week. The fast-food chain says the restaurants were closed out of an "abundance of caution" and that no further employees have tested positive. Victoria announced eight new cases of coronavirus on Monday, including two close contacts of cases in a cluster linked to the Fawkner McDonald's, and three cases in hotel quarantine. The Fawkner McDonald's outlet has now been linked to 12 cases. McDonald's Australia chief executive Andrew Gregory told ABC Radio Melbourne the driver's positive test was confirmed "as late as yesterday [Sunday] afternoon" and the 12 restaurants were closed within hours of the company being told. Latest information from the Victorian Government"It’s going to impact about 1,000 staff," he said. Most of these workers are expected to return to work as the restaurants reopen in coming days with about 200, who were working during the deliveries or afterwards, asked to stay at home for two weeks. The outlet at Craigieburn was closed on Friday for cleaning after an employee — a relative of one of the cases linked to the Fawkner outlet — tested positive. A McDonald's spokesperson confirmed the restaurant closures on Monday morning. "McDonald's Australia confirms no other employees have tested positive for COVID-19 at this time," the spokesperson said in a statement. "However, out of an abundance of caution, we have made the decision to close and conduct a deep clean of 12 restaurants in Victoria, following confirmation a truck driver for an external service provider has tested positive for COVID-19. "The truck driver made deliveries to 12 restaurants and interacted with a small number of restaurant employees on each occasion while asymptomatic and unaware they had contracted COVID-19."Potential close contacts and employees who worked shifts during and after the driver's deliveries had been told not to return to work for 14 days and to get tested, the spokesperson said. "The Department of Health has identified the truck driver as a workplace close contact of the previously announced Craigieburn COVID-19 case."The spokesperson said McDonald's would reopen each of the restaurants after the deep cleans were completed and when replacement workers were available. The closed restaurants are:Melton EastLaverton NorthYallambieTaylors LakesCampbellfieldSunburyHoppers CrossingRiverdale VillageSandownCalder Highway Northbound/OutboundCalder Highway Southbound/InboundBP Rockbank Service Centre OutboundPremier says outbreak a 'really big concern'Premier Daniel Andrews told Channel Nine this morning any outbreak, particularly one involving a case with no symptoms, was "obviously a really big concern". He said the McDonald's cluster highlighted how rapidly the virus spread and why testing was so important. "We're going to see more of these outbreaks," Mr Andrews said. "The Prime Minister has made that clear. "I've made the point that it's going to be part of this virus as it presents in the weeks and months to come and that's why we've all boosted our teams right across the country to be able to track, trace and respond really quickly to outbreaks."The Premier added that the state's public health team were "very confident" about Monday's reopening of Cedar Meats' Brooklyn abattoir, which has been linked to 100 cases. "I think there's about 20 staff going back in there," he said. "They're working in one particular part of that business in the cold storage part of that business. "That's a significant outbreak but one that the Chief Medical Officer, Brendan Murphy, has made clear has been handled very well by the public health team."Single case closes two Melbourne businessesMeanwhile, a Domino's restaurant in Fairfield and a mattress and foam manufacturer in Deer Park were closed on Friday after man who worked at both businesses tested positive to coronavirus. A spokesperson for the pizza chain said in a statement the employee last worked at the Fairfield restaurant on May 8 and was asymptomatic at the time. The store was undergoing a "full environmental clean" and would be reopened on May 23, the statement said. "Upon being notified of the positive test result, Domino’s immediately closed this store, notified all Fairfield store team members and their families, and recommended everyone self-isolate and seek testing," it said. Comfort Group chief executive Peter Mullin said the same man worked at the company's Deer Park manufacturing facility. Mr Mullin said the employee began suffering cold-like symptoms and got tested the weekend of May 9 and 10 and had not been to work since. The factory was shut on Friday after the test results came back on Thursday night. Mr Mullin said the facility was being deep-cleaned over the weekend and would remain closed until Wednesday. About 200 people who had been at the factory since April 10 were being tested, he added. "We've been implementing stringent practices and distancing protocols including segregated meal break breaks and separating workers," he said. The company had identified only three people who would be classified as "close contacts" of the infected employee and two of them had already tested negative, he added.
Coronavirus crisis a 'heaven-sent opportunity' to reset national park tourism, advocates say
As a national parks advocate, Nick Sawyer has been more frustrated than most by the coronavirus-crisis park closures, but he's seeing them as a chance rethink tourism. Key points:There are calls for a more sustainable use of reopening National Parks with less overcrowding rather than new infrastructureSustainability is seen as an important factor, with an industry less reliance on cruise ships and planesFamily and friends visiting each other will be the first wave of tourism recovery as the mode, price and destination of travel changesMr Sawyer, president of Tasmania's National Parks Association, has witnessed the boom in the state's industry in recent years, as its natural wonders like Cradle Mountain and Wineglass Bay draw tourists from the mainland and around the globe. He thinks the pandemic shutdown of Australia's parks and the devastation of the tourism industry should be seized as an opportunity to look outside the box as we rebuild. "This is a heaven-sent opportunity to rethink the whole approach," he said. For Mr Sawyer, better ways of managing the return of tourists and eventually their booming numbers won't necessarily mean more infrastructure, like dedicated walkways, viewing platforms and handrails. "For example, the very popular Wineglass Bay lookout [in Tasmania] is becoming too crowded, so the response [has been to consider building] a second lookout nearby," he said. "You don't need a second lookout. "You could try and space the tourists more evenly over the course of the day, thereby avoiding the worst of the crowding and giving them a much better experience."He points to shuttle bus systems as an example of a way visitor numbers could be managed at Wineglass Bay, to "avoid having to expand the car park, yet again". Mr Sawyer is among a growing number of voices suggesting the reopening of national parks across Australia presents an opportunity for a reset in the way Australia's natural wonders are managed. Tourism Australia managing director Phillipa Harrison said the reopening of parks would ignite people's interest in new ways of travelling. "There has been a rising interest in sustainability, and making sure you leave a light footprint when you travel," she said. "We think this is going to accelerate people's desire to travel more sustainably."University of Queensland Associate Professor Judith Mair said the pandemic had highlighted a myriad of ways Australia's tourism industry could be more sustainable, and not just when it came to tackling overcrowding. "It might be putting too much reliance on one sole market, it might be relying too much on cruise tourists, it might be involving the local community in decision-making," she said. "There are a lot of ways in which tourism could come back better than it was before."Tasmanian wildlife park operator Gena Cantwell said a financially sustainable attraction was now front-of-mind. Her park relied on the 40 cruise ships that were visiting Tasmania's north-west each year before an outbreak of coronavirus at the North West Regional Hospital in Burnie forced the strictest lock-down measures in the country. Ms Cantwell said she was forced to stand down some staff, and look for ways to retain keepers and feed animals. "It was horrible. It was probably one of the hardest days that we had to deal with here," she said. "It will always be in the back of our minds about how something like this can affect us so broadly. "It was surprising how quickly a virus can bring everything unstuck."After lockdown ends she said she would look to the local market, and locals' relatives, to help reopen the operation, but could not envision staff numbers increasing for some time. "I don't imagine that the international tourists or even the mainland tourists are going to come in any hurry," she said. "They're going to be a little bit scared, so we're just going to have to look and focus on what we can do for our local market and our staff. "I think our tourism bodies are going to have to do a fair bit of damage control."Tourism Australia said it was on the case, but the price, destination and mode of tourism travel would change. "We really are looking to our domestic market to get our industry back on their feet again," Ms Harrison said. "We probably will see for a little while people wanting to control their own environment a little more, so we do expect to see people staying a little closer to home and taking their own transport."That might mean people using hire cars over planes and buses, or choosing short-stay accommodation over hotels and buffet breakfasts. "This is a new normal for tourist operators," she said. "They are going to have to work out how they can run their businesses economically and work out how they make money with the new regulations around social distancing."sMoney on the minds of tourists and operatorsAssociation Professor Mair believes people will have less money to spend, and that will be reflected in what's on offer. "People tend to think of tourism as a recovery vehicle for a destination, so it's about getting people back in and spending their money in a destination as soon as possible," she said. "Initially that will be very localised, so you might be travelling from Brisbane to the Gold Coast, or Melbourne to Mornington. "They'll have to be value-added experiences offered, so perhaps hotels or accommodation might do three nights for the price of two."Nick Sawyer suggested any government's stimulus funding for the tourism industry should aim to draw people to lesser-known national parks, rather than well-known attractions. "There's a huge maintenance backlog of existing facilities," he said. "In a lot of our parks, the facilities in the remote areas are getting terribly run down."The lesser-known attractions will also be the focus of Tourism Australia's campaigns. "I think people think they know what there is to see and do in Australia," Ms Harrison said. "But there has been so much development in the last decade particularly."The industry group is going to encourage Australians to reignite their love for the road trip, and visit friends and family in initial stages, before widening their scope. "We are going to be promoting some really great road trips you can do either intrastate or interstate, and also some great epic national road trips."
Rockhampton aged care emergency sparks second investigation after nurse tests positive to coronavirus
Queensland Health says there will be an independent investigation into how a nurse with coronavirus continued to work at a Rockhampton aged care home, while showing symptoms. Key points:More than 600 people were tested for COVID-19 at fever clinics in Rockhampton at the weekendA separate 200 staff and residents of an aged care home have tested negative to the virus, after a nurse who worked there tested positive. More than 40 nurses are in isolation and 20 have been deployed from southern parts of the state to assistHealth Minister Steven Miles said he has asked the department's director-general to commission the investigation. "We want to understand exactly how it happened, what went wrong, why it went wrong and how we can make sure it never happens again," he said. "Not just at the 16 aged care facilities run at HHS but also at our Queensland Health sites. "We need to ensure all of our patients and residents in our care are kept safe."The Central Queensland Hospital and Health Service has also launched an investigation. More than 40 nurses are in self-isolation and hundreds of people are awaiting coronavirus test results after the nurse tested positive to COVID-19 last week and the aged care facility went into lockdown. The nurses — who worked in the same unit as the nurse who tested positive — have all tested negative but will be in isolation for two weeks in case they show symptoms and have to be retested. Mr Miles said 35 residents were moved from the aged care centre to other facilities across Rockhampton over the weekend to enable residents to have private rooms. "That has allowed residents to be moved around in the facility and have private rooms where they can be isolated with their own bathrooms, and infection control can be implemented," he said. Mr Miles said 763 Rockhampton locals were tested over the weekend and of the returned results, none have been positive. Not clear how nurse contracted virusChief Health Officer Dr Jeannette Young said all staff and residents from the facility will be closely monitored for a two-week period. "All of the 114 residents who were in the facility at the time the enrolled nurse was working in the facility have been tested and all of them are negative," she said. "Plus all of the staff who have worked at the facility for the last month have now been tested — except for one who's been on leave — all of those staff have been tested and are negative."Dr Young said she hoped the two investigations would get to the bottom of why the nurse continued to work while displaying symptoms and after being tested. "I've been very disappointed that happened," she said. "Since she [the nurse] had the confirmed result she has been extremely cooperative and has worked very closely with us, and indeed agreed to a second test. "Prior to then we need to work out what exactly happened."Dr Young said Queensland Health was still trying to work out how the nurse contracted coronavirus. "At this stage we still don't know whether she contracted the infection on one of the two flights that she was on to go down to Brisbane and back to Rockhampton, or whether it was in Brisbane itself — we don't know," she said. "She is a community-acquired case, we know it's unlikely she acquired it here in Rockhampton because it's so long since you had a confirmed case, but of course that still is possible."Nurses sent from southern QueenslandMedical staff from southern Queensland, including about 20 nurses, have been flown in to assist in hospitals, fever clinics and aged care facilities as the number of people stepping forward for testing increases. The crisis was sparked after an enrolled nurse, who is understood to have worked in reception at the state-run North Rockhampton Nursing Centre, tested positive to coronavirus last Thursday. The nurse is believed to have been contagious since May 3 and continued working while showing symptoms. She returned to her workplace after being sent for coronavirus testing, but before her results came back. Queensland Health is investigating the circumstances, including whether the nurse was checked for fever every day, as per requirements for all aged care facilities. A spokesperson for Queensland Health said all contacts were being closely monitored and secondary testing would be conducted if any of these individuals showed symptoms. Nurses in self-isolationCentral Queensland Hospital and Health Service said more than 600 people have been tested for the coronavirus at fever clinics in Rockhampton since Friday, and that more 5,000 calls had been made to the coronavirus hotline. Grant Burton from the Queensland Nurses and Midwifery Union said more than 40 nurses in the Rockhampton region had gone into isolation until they received their test results. "The fact that 41 or 42 staff have now been [self-isolated] at home has certainly been a challenge," he said. "Health services have risen to that and have staff flying in to assist."Mr Burton said union representatives were working with Queensland Health to ensure additional staff would be sent to Rockhampton if required in the coming days. "Staff are coming from Metro North and South with further discussions with Wide Bay and Darling Downs," he said. "They will be where they're needed — whether that's the fever clinic, the general hospital or the aged care centre."There are now two fever clinics in Rockhampton, with others at Yeppoon and Gladstone. Mr Burton said with increased demand for nursing and health services, it was important for those on the front line to remember their own health. "They certainly go above and beyond, and they feel the need to come to work, but the message is clear — if you are sick, stay home," he said. "There is additional staff coming in and we will be working in collaboration with the service to identify any areas that are running short."'Eerily like Newmarch House'Aged and Disability Advocacy Australia (ADA) is a Commonwealth-funded group which provides support to older people using aged care, and their families and carers. After hearing from families at Sydney's Newmarch House, CEO Geoff Rowe said he was "disturbed" to learn about the news in Rockhampton on Friday. "It is eerily like what has happened at Newmarch House," he said. "The infection was brought into an aged care facility in Sydney by a staff person who was unwell. "What we're seeing coming out of the North Rockhampton Nursing Centre is very encouraging, we're seeing a very proactive response. What we saw at Newmarch was a very slow response."Mr Rowe said it could be a stressful and traumatic time for central Queensland families. "It's not unusual, based on our experience with Newmarch in Sydney, for family members to be feeling left out of the loop and to learn what is happening on the news, which is very distressing," he said. "A lot of family members concerns were similar or the same, it was often around the lack of communication, the lack of any knowledge of what was happening with the family member. "I think what we're seeing at the moment at the [North Rockhampton Nursing] Centre is quite a calculated and a careful response and unfortunately families need to be patient."He said the advocacy group was open to providing weekly video link updates, similar to what has been done for Newmarch House families, to improve communication if families reach out. Residents and families can contact ADA on their 1800 700 600 hotline between 6:00am and 10:00pm everyday for support.
Coronavirus sparked an economic recession that takes more jobs from women than men
The coronavirus pandemic ravaging the planet has laid bare the unequal toll the virus is having on many segments of society, namely minorities and the disadvantaged. There are fewer places this is more profound than the United States. In a country that was unequal prior to the outbreak, the pandemic has exacerbated its racial inequalities, revealed its wealth disparities and exposed gaping holes in its social safety net. Putting the health crisis aside, the economic collapse triggered by the shutdown has been nothing short of staggering. It too has revealed another disparity. More than 33 million Americans have lost their jobs, and for the first time in decades, the face of this financial catastrophe is a predominately female one. If you break down the numbers even further, it's affecting women of colour the most. But this phenomenon isn't limited to the world's largest economy. Global blanket shutdowns and social distancing measures are shattering female-dominated industries like retail, hospitality, education and healthcare. Female unemployment rate hits 15 per cent"It is a she-cession," said Institute for Women's Policy Research president, C Nicole Mason. "What I mean by that is that women have been disproportionately impacted by the job losses over the past couple of months."More than half of the jobs lost in the US during April were held by women. Since February, female unemployment has jumped five-fold to 15 per cent. By comparison, the jobless rate for men was 13 per cent. It's a stark contrast to the global financial crisis, in which men largely shouldered the losses in the financial and construction sectors. Tina Edwards is among the millions at the forefront of this crisis. "I want to say we go back and reopen. But survive? I'm not sure," she said. The mother of six owns a day spa in Washington DC, and like so many other businesses, she was forced to close her doors. So far, her applications for small business and unemployment benefits have been rejected by America's social security system. "I personally don't believe we will reopen until July or August and even then, we won't be 50 per cent of the business we were."Her family used the Federal Government's one-off stimulus cheque to pay bills but with that now spent, she's eating into her emergency savings to make ends meet. "I don't know how, with one income, it's going to work," she said. "This is a really long emergency. With no extra income, we've never been down to just one income. "I know worst case, there are resources we can take advantage of. We haven't got there yet, but I wouldn't doubt I'd ask for assistance if I needed it."Women make up 70 per cent of global healthcare workforceThe April jobs numbers are a stunning and disappointing reversal from a major milestone in December, when women held more payroll jobs than men for the first time in about a decade. The losses are being felt across the globe including Australia. The official jobless figures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics show the number of jobs slumped by 8.1 per cent for women, compared to 6.2 per cent for men. Between mid-March and mid-April, 55 per cent of the jobs lost were held by women. There's no question working from home in a white-collar job is easier in this day and age of internet connectivity. More to the point, for those in roles that require close contact with people, there is no alternative. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has warned the pandemic throws up compounding burdens for women. Firstly, they make up 70 per cent of the global healthcare workforce, meaning they are more likely to be on the frontline treating people who are fighting the disease. They also make up the majority of employees in the parts of the economy that have been hardest hit by the lockdowns. Some women are taking on additional childcare burdensAmid it all, they continue to do most of the unpaid care work within the home, which has in some cases forced women to reduce their hours or leave their job to care for their children. This has been more pronounced in countries like the US, where schools and day care centres have been shuttered across the country for months, adding home-schooling to the list of chores. "They are struggling to put food on the table but they're also struggling to meet their primary care responsibilities," Ms Mason said. She said research by her institute showed 30 million women in the US with children under the age of 13 provided 40 per cent of their household income. "So, this pandemic will have a devastating impact on those families where women are the sole or primary breadwinner," she said. The big, unknown question is how long the shutdowns will last, which will determine how deep and painful the downturn will be. The road to recovery is still hard to visualiseThe unfolding crisis in countries hit hardest, like America, could hamper the road to recovery with many economists warning there won't be a one-for-one replacement in jobs lost. "Are those companies going to be able to rehire those people? That we just don't know," University of Michigan's Justin Wolfers said. "How many bankruptcies are we going to see? How much downsizing are we going to see?"If those temporary layoffs become permanent. That's when this moves from being a short, sharp shock to a long, deep ongoing recession," he said. In past economic crises, countries have wrestled their way out with government-backed nation building infrastructure projects. But if the danger of catching the virus continues to linger or a second wave hits, that might not be enough to drag the world out of this slumber.
Complex coronavirus travel refund process leaves couple $20,000 out of pocket
A Melbourne couple has been left $20,000 out of pocket after their South African odyssey was cancelled because of coronavirus restrictions. Key points:Thousands of traveller are complaining about being refused refunds in social media support groupsOne industry expert says the refund process is complex, with multiple providers often involvedThe ACCC says consumer guarantees are unlikely to apply where travel is shut down by governmentBrigid and Don Burnard booked a $33,798 package holiday with Imagine Cruising which included a luxury cruise, rail adventure and safari. The company agreed to refund a third of the payment, but $20,246 remains outstanding, offered as a travel credit for the same itinerary in the future. Ms Burnard said due to her husband's ill health, and the fact it could be years before they can safely travel again due to coronavirus, a credit was "out of the question". "He turns 89 in August. It is impossible to even fathom him planning to go on any long trip," she said. The Burnards are not alone in their frustration, with thousands of consumers joining social media support groups after having their request for refunds refused. Facebook groups like Flight Centre Class Action Australia, Luxury Escaped Us and MSC Cancelled Cruise Group for Australians reveal the frustration of customers left out of pocket. Managing director of the Council of Australian Tour Operators Brett Jardine said travel companies were doing it tough and it would be a "far better outcome for all concerned" if customers agreed to postpone their trip, instead of cancelling. Mr Jardine said the refund process was not always straightforward, due to the complex nature of travel-provider networks. "Within that supply chain, there are travel agents, tour operators, wholesalers, destination management companies," Mr Jardine said. "The money can be caught up anywhere within that ecosystem, and there are binding agreements within each of those layers."An advertisement for a luxury African holiday torn out of a newspaper. An advertisement for the Imagine Cruising holiday that was meant to depart in March.(ABC News: Alison Xiao)The Australian Consumer Competition Commission (ACCC) said a consumer's right to a refund was governed by individual terms and conditions. "Where travel has been shut down by government action, the consumer guarantees are unlikely to apply," it said in a statement. Ms Burnard said chasing up the company had been stressful and confusing. "It seems to be that it's deliberately made difficult, so they don't have to give you answers," she said. "You think 'what can I do next?'. And there doesn't seem to be anywhere else to turn."Travellers who may be experiencing similar issues to the Burnards can find advice through Choice, the ACCC and state consumer protection bodies. Law firm Slater and Gordon are also investigating a class action against major travel providers. The Burnards said they would keep fighting, even though the process had been tiring and painful. "It's just been a drawn-out saga … it just gets us down," Ms Burnard said. Imagine Cruising has been contacted for comment. After this story was published, the company told the ABC the couple would get a full refund "in due course". The company said is was doing its "very best" to find favourable options for their customers, but that confirming refund details with suppliers was "proving to be challenging and time consuming".
Greens demand job guarantees and free education for young people in coronavirus recovery plan
Anyone under 30 would be guaranteed a job, a better income or a free place at a university or TAFE, under a new policy position the federal Greens have launched in response to the coronavirus pandemic. Key points:The Greens want the Government to take on billions of debt to rebuild the economyThe party is warning young people are at risk of facing long-term unemploymentThe Government has cautioned future generations would have to pay for its spendingThe crossbench party wants the Federal Government to take on tens of billions of dollars of debt in a bid to rebuild the Australian economy after COVID-19. Leader Adam Bandt accused the Coalition and Labor of having responded to the crisis with austerity measures, rather than billions in new spending to reshape Australia in a post-COVID environment. "Young people have been smashed by the corona crisis," he said. "If we don't offer every young person a job, a study place or a decent income, we risk creating a lost generation."The Federal Government has allocated more than $230 billion to coronavirus-stimulus measures, including a $130 billion six-month wage subsidy for six million workers. The Government has also doubled the JobSeeker payment, previously called Newstart. Labor has backed both measures but wants the JobKeeper program to be extended to include more casual workers, with leader Anthony Albanese urging the Government to channel Australia's former wartime prime ministers to reshape the Australian economy. He wants the Government to build high-speed rail, decentralise services and revitalise the nation's manufacturing sector. But the Greens want the Coalition to go even further. "If we don't, the cost will be very, very high," Mr Bandt told the ABC. "We learnt from the global financial crisis that for young people who are starting their working lives at a time of recession, they carry the scars with them for life unless they're given the opportunity of good, decent work with decent security working on meaningful projects. "We owe this to young people because otherwise we'll be stuck paying for income support for a very long time for what could be a lost generation."Dubbed Invest To Recover, the Greens' plan seeks to create almost 900,000 jobs building renewable energy infrastructure in the public and private sectors. It also seeks to spend $60 billion to revive domestic manufacturing and processing. The arts would receive billions, to support a sector that has missed out on the JobKeeper $1,500-a-fortnight payment. The Greens want a $2.3 billion entertainment and creative industries fund to put artists into every school and library in Australia. The fund would also pay for festivals, films and live performances. The Government has repeatedly said the doubling of the JobSeeker payment, to $1,100 a fortnight, was only a temporary measure. Mr Bandt said the Greens would use their Senate crossbench numbers to fight any effort to return the payment to $550 a fortnight. Labor has also indicated it would fight any effort to return JobSeeker to its previous rate. Mr Bandt said it was incumbent upon the Government to act as a "safety-net employer", in guaranteeing work to people until the private sector rehired the 1 million people who have lost their jobs due to coronavirus. The Greens' call for a debt-laden approach to Government spending is all but certain to be rejected by the Coalition. Conservative commentators and some within the Government's backbench are already pushing for the Coalition to use a pre-planned June review of JobKeeper to cut back the program. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg has given no indication that was likely, but has warned about the economic toll additional spending would have on future generations. "Australians know there is no money tree," he told the Parliament last week. "What we borrow today, we must repay in the future. "Temporary and targeted, the new spending measures were not designed to go forever but to build a bridge to the recovery phase."
Coalition of 62 countries backs joint Australian, EU push for independent inquiry into coronavirus outbreak
A coalition of 62 countries has backed a joint Australian and European Union push for an independent inquiry into the coronavirus outbreak ahead of a crucial World Health Assembly (WHA) meeting on Monday in Geneva. Key points:European nations and Australia have been rallying support for a draft EU motionThe motion does not specifically mention China or the city of WuhanAt this stage neither China nor the US have backed the motionAustralia was the first nation to call for an independent inquiry into how the coronavirus started. That drew furious condemnation from Beijing, which accused Australia of launching a political attack on China. But international support for the idea has been steadily growing. The Morrison Government has now swung its diplomatic firepower behind the European Union, which has also been pressing for an investigation while taking a more conciliatory line with Beijing. European nations and Australia have been rallying support for a draft EU motion which calls for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of "the WHO-coordinated international health response to COVID-19". The motion does not specifically mention China or the city of Wuhan where the outbreak is believed to have begun. Coronavirus investigation call made Australia a targetAustralia experienced astonishing hostility from our Chinese trading partner after calling for an inquiry into the start of the outbreak — but we're not the only ones feeling their wrath, writes Andrew Probyn. Australian Government sources said the language was strong enough to ensure that a proper and thorough investigation took place, although they are still calling this a "first step" towards ensuring transparency. At this stage neither China nor the US have backed the motion. EU and Australian diplomats were still working on Sunday to convince both major powers to give their support. In a statement, Foreign Affairs Minister Marise Payne said: "There is positive support for an independent review into the pandemic to help the world learn the lessons necessary to protect global health. "Australia and a significant number of countries are co-sponsoring the EU-led resolution, which includes a call for an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation. "This is about collaborating to equip the international community to better prevent or counter the next pandemic and keep our citizens safe."The EU's spokeswoman for foreign affairs, Virginie Battu-Henriksson, said the organisation was focused on reaching a consensus for an inquiry. "Of course, we need to have the support of all the major players, and China is one of them," she told the ABC. Meanwhile, US diplomats have been pressing for tougher language that specifically calls for a probe into how the virus started in the Chinese city of Wuhan. US President Donald Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo have both furiously denounced China's initial response to the virus, accusing it of covering up the initial outbreak and allowing it to spread around the world. But Ms Battu-Henriksson said the EU was focused on "really getting together and finding a solution which is workable for all". "For us, it is not the moment for us to enter any kind of blame game as we've seen in narratives from one part or another of the world," she said.
Nurses praised for rapidly upskilling amid coronavirus threat
Wollongong registered nurse Carmen Wood is among many across the nation who have volunteered to rapidly upskill as part of preparations and response to the coronavirus threat. Key points:Nurses from different departments in hospitals are volunteering to upskill to intensive care to help in the COVID-19 crisisSenior colleagues have praised the nurses for their response and speed at upskillingThe rapid upskill is providing hospitals with greater capacity for any potential second waveMs Wood worked in intensive care almost a decade ago and said when the call went out for more staff to return to ICU she wanted to help her colleagues. "Physical risks didn't actually cross my mind, I have been working as a nurse for 12 years and never in my career did I feel at risk," she said. But it took a week for her to weigh up the potential emotional impact. "Some of my deep concerns were what I was seeing overseas — images and stories of staff in Italy, the UK and Spain," she said. "I was also trying to prepare myself for the worst, that meant potentially having patients pass away in our unit without any of their family beside them."Rapid upskillMs Wood said she was impressed by the speedy creation of education resources and enjoyed working with a buddy for on-the-job training. "Getting my head around the electronic medical records system 'eRIC' has been one that has taken me a bit of time, and getting my head around the medications that we give in intensive care," she said. "You'll find that a lot of the medication in intensive care aren't given in any other ward in the hospital, so there is a lot more complexity there."Fast response praisedA surgeon, wearing scrubs, stands outside a regional hospital"They are putting themselves in uncomfortable situations, and to be honest what we are doing anyway is an uncomfortable situation around the pandemic, so they have said as if that isn't enough we are going to retrain as well," Dr Ashford said. "Suddenly they not only have to understand the complex machinery, but complex patients, and that is a pretty big challenge."The hospital's director of nursing and midwifery, Kathleen Thorpe, said she was incredibly proud of her team. "Not one minute has been wasted, everything is about preparedness and planning, and not just for next week, but for the many months ahead that this could take," Ms Thorpe said. "As for the bravery, I remember one of the first days telling staff we were changing the patient acuity they have and there were two new graduates who put up their hands and said 'This is what I have been waiting for'. It does give you goosebumps."Creating capacity for possible second waveWhile local staff had not faced the surge of COVID-19 cases as experienced in some countries, Dr Ashford knew there could still be a challenge ahead. "A lot of people who put their hand up originally thought they were putting their hand up to go into a storm, but it's ended up being a calm day, so that is making the decision more difficult for people who are thinking, why did I bother doing this?""But this gives us a capacity that would not be possible without them putting their hands up."With International Nurses Day last week, Ms Wood said she was incredibly proud of what she and her colleagues had achieved in such a short space of time. "Coming together and delivering the best care they can in a such a stressful time," she said.
Coronavirus put the brakes on the Gold Coast's super-fast growth, so what's next?
Some people believe coronavirus has given the Gold Coast time to slow down and reconsider the pace of development, while others say more construction is needed to kickstart the local economy. Key points:The Gold Coast expected to grow by 350,000, bringing its population to about 1 million by 2041The construction sector has warned building approvals could drop by 45 per cent due to coronavirusA developer says the industry is key to economic revival but a community group has called for a rethinkThe comments come as the city's population growth faces hiccups and the construction industry warns of a massive downturn. The President of Community Alliance Association, John Hicks, has been a vocal opponent of what he says are "excessive relaxations" of the council's City Plan — a guideline for the scope and scale of developments. "It will be a useful breathing space to have that conversation with the wider community without hectic pressures from very fast-paced development," he said. "We should use that time wisely to have a good think about the sort of city we are building."But with the construction sector employing up to 10 per cent of the Gold Coast's workforce, one developer has called for "more of the same" to help the city's economic recovery. 'Couple of bridges' to crossMaster Builders Queensland has warned the number of building approvals in the region could drop by 45 per cent. Developer Greg Rix said maintaining the Gold Coast's strong population growth was vital but there were "a couple of bridges" to cross first, including restrictions on international travel. "We're getting between 12,000 to 15,000 new people moving to the Gold Coast per annum, quite a large number of those are overseas investors," he said. "Interstate people migrating to the Gold Coast, financially, do they still have the ability to move to an area like our own?"If you don't have buyers, it's no good building projects."Mr Rix said a number of projects had been put on hold as the industry came to terms with the economic fallout of coronavirus. "The uncertainty will be the migration of people continuing to come to the Gold Coast," he said. "We have relied on overseas markets, that is a given, whether that overseas market returns at the same level or how long it takes to return, will affect the rollout of development on the Gold Coast."'Balance is tipped in favour' of developersMr Hicks said it was "business as usual" at Gold Coast City Council, despite four new councillors being elected in March. "We think it's business that's leading us down to city development more akin to Gotham City by the sea than a world-class sub-tropical leafy city". "Things need to be improved," he said. Mr Hicks said height and density limits in the City Plan had been relaxed too often, resulting in "overscale buildings with a very poor resident experience in adjacent properties". "The balance is tipped in favour strongly of the developer and we acknowledge that balance needs to be returned to a better place where the interests of the community and the developer are better balanced."A spokesperson for the City of Gold Coast said "it would not be considered appropriate for Council to hold regular town hall meetings in relation to developments". "Public notification requirements are stipulated within the State’s Planning Act. Town Hall meetings would not be appropriate in the context of statutory timeframes that are also mandated by the Planning Act."Development a 'backbone' of the Gold Coast's economyMr Rix said development had been "one of the backbones of the Gold Coast economy" but there would be "repercussions on settlement into our community which of course affects development and construction". "You won't see overseas travel into Australia probably till next year so that means that even when we're fired up in the economy we won't have those overseas investments," he said. "There may well be projects that were earmarked for construction this year delayed."But he said "post the virus, you're going to need employment" and that development meant more "people spending money at shopping centres, at schools". "The positive side is that the Gold Coast is still the premiere place to live in Australia and I believe we will see development continue to go forward."Mr Hicks said he was yet to see any significant drop on development proposals but that projects which fall outside of the City Plan should be rejected. "We're yet see the cranes disappear from the horizon. "We know we have to grow, that's acknowledged, but we just have to do it well," he said.
Protests against coronavirus lockdown measures spread in the UK and across Europe
Police in London have arrested 19 people for deliberately breaking social distancing guidelines to protest against the rules, as demonstrations against coronavirus lockdown measures swept across Europe. Key points:Protests against coronavirus measures were held in major cities such as London and BerlinIn Spain, protesters denounced the Government as communists seeking to ruin the countryProtesters in Poland carried signs reading "Work and bread" and "It will be normal again"The Metropolitan Police said a group in central London's Hyde Park had been protesting about the Government's response to the COVID-19 pandemic and had failed to comply with repeated requests to disperse. Police officers were seen taking away protesters, including the brother of Britain's former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, Piers Corbyn. The protests occurred on the first weekend since Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced a slight loosening of England's lockdown. Mr Johnson announced a limited easing of Britain's coronavirus lockdown, adopting a cautious approach to try to ensure there was no second peak of infections that could further hurt the economy and cost lives. The country has been in lockdown since March 23. An unidentified woman wearing a mask took part in the protest holding a sign that said "stop violating our human rights". "I'm protesting because they are violating our rights and I'm against mandatory vaccination. It should be a free choice and I will not be putting poison into my body," she said. A total of 34,466 people have died in the United Kingdom and 236,711 cases were registered. "It was disappointing that a relatively small group in Hyde Park came together to protest the regulations in clear breach of the guidance, putting themselves and others at risk of infection," Laurence Taylor, Deputy Assistant Commissioner at the Metropolitan Police, said in a statement. 'Covidiots' gather to protests restrictions in GermanyIn Germany, thousands of people across the country took to the streets on Saturday to protest against restrictions. Germany's death toll from the virus has been lower than most of its European neighbours and some lockdown measures have already been relaxed. However, protests against the measures Chancellor Angela Merkel insists are needed to slow down the coronavirus outbreak have become more vocal and demonstrators have filled the streets for the second weekend in a row. Derided on social media as "covidiots" who risk causing a second wave of infections that could lead to a tightening of restrictions, protesters staged demonstrations at several locations across the capital Berlin and the surrounding state of Brandenburg. In Munich, organisers asked authorities to give the green light for a rally of up to 10,000 people on the Thersienwiese, a large square in the city centre on which Munich normally stages its world famous Oktoberfest beer festival. But city officials pointed to the need to respect social distancing rules and allowed a demonstration of up to 1,000 people. The hard core of protesters is being led by several new groups. One group is Resistance 2020, led by a lawyer from eastern Leipzig and a doctor from south-western Germany who question official corona statistics and view the main political parties as constructs of an elitist rule. Another group called COMPACT describes itself as the "sharp sword against imperial propaganda". It declares on its website that it is helping the "information offensive" for the growing protest movement. German media have suggested Russia could be behind a misinformation campaign that is spurring on protesters. After winning global respect for keeping the death rate low in Germany, Ms Merkel last week bowed to pressure from some of Germany's powerful regional premiers and agreed to a gradual re-opening of schools, shops and restaurants and even football. However, Ms Merkel, a scientist, has repeatedly warned about a second wave of infections, and a brief uptick in the reproduction rate to above the critical threshold of 1 earlier this week caused fresh concern. The new coronavirus has so far infected more than 173,000 people in Germany and killed nearly 7,900. Most Germans approve Ms Merkel's crisis management, with polls showing support for her conservative CDU/CSU alliance surging to 40 per cent. Dozens arrested in PolandDozens of people, including a senator, were detained during a protest of business owners in the Polish capital against restrictions brought in to tackle the new coronavirus. Warsaw police used tear gas against protesters, intervening in the demonstration after the city's administrators claimed the gathering was illegal because it had not been previously approved. Jacek Bury, a senator for the opposition Civic Platform party, said he was hurt by police when trying to defend another protester. Police said in a statement that public gatherings were still banned under government restrictions. "Unfortunately we are dealing with cases of aggression towards police. Due to the attacks on civil servants, we used methods of direct confrontation such as physical force and [tear] gas," the Warsaw police said in a tweet. However, police denied using force against Mr Bury — something that he claimed was a lie. Poland imposed a strict lockdown in mid-March, and while the restrictions affecting the country's economy are being slowly loosened, many business people say there are still too many. Protesters carrying signs saying, "Work and bread" and "It will be normal again" gathered in Warsaw's Old Town, saying restrictions need to be lifted further in order for them to sustain their livelihoods. Hair salons and restaurants are expected to reopen with new safety measures in place on Monday. Poland, with 38 million people, has more than 18,000 confirmed infections of the new virus and more than 900 deaths. Spaniards call on government to resignProtests sprang up around Spain on Saturday, with demonstrators gathering to bang pots and pans and call for the government to resign. At the largest such demonstration, in Madrid's wealthy Salamanca neighbourhood, several hundred people gathered despite the efforts of police to enforce social-distancing. Carrying Spanish flags and crying "viva Espana!" some denounced the leftist Government as communists seeking to ruin the country. "I am against all the measures which this Government has used to manage the coronavirus," banker Jose Flores said. "They need to test everybody so healthy people can get back to work and we can restart the economy," said a man who gave his name only as Carlos. "The worst virus is going to be the virus of Pedro and Pablo, who are going to ruin 47 million Spaniards," he said, referring to Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez and Deputy Prime Minister Pablo Iglesias. Similar protests took place in Zaragoza and the southern city of Seville, until recently a Socialist party stronghold. "It doesn't matter what the demonstrations are about. The important thing is to maintain social distancing," Mr Sanchez said. Silent protest held in ItalyIn Italy, members of the Italian Hospitality Network held spontaneous protests in several cities amid concerns that restrictions would negatively affect their income. Hospitality workers in Rome protested in front of the Pantheon, wearing their uniforms with a mourning armband while they stood in silence for several minutes. Restaurant managers and owners are worried that the safety measures they will have to adopt will not allow them to work properly and could result in financial losses for the business, as well as the income of their employees.
Coronavirus pushing bowls clubs into a major rethink
Well before coronavirus sent Australia into lockdown, bowls was facing dark times. Key points:The CEO of Bowls Australia said many clubs have suffered significant financial lossInternational representative Kristina Krstic says now would be a great opportunity to bring young people to the sportThe sport has made a push to increase membership, which has dwindled in recent yearsA decline in membership and revenue across the board for a decade had resulted in dozens of clubs folding in Australia's largest citiesIn 2019, several clubs in Brisbane and Sydney were forced to close their doors, struggling to compete with not only other sports but pubs and restaurants as well. The nationwide shutdown has only added to the headache of many clubs across the country. With many clubs slowly opening up their rinks, the long road back to financial stability for most clubs really begins. "Bowls Australia have recently undertaken a national survey of clubs and from the results, many clubs have clearly suffered significant financial losses which will necessitate a long period of recovery for many," Bowls Australia CEO Neil Dalrymple said. "It will take some time for bowls in Australia to recover but we remain optimistic that the sport and the 1,832 clubs across Australia will play a major role in reconnecting Australians on the other side of this pandemic."Despite the optimism, bowls has struggled for many years. The closure of Waverton North Sydney, as well as Toowong in Brisbane, cast a dark shadow over the future of the sport. The added pressure of coronavirus has left the top brass of the sport under no illusions. "The disappearance of any bowls clubs would be detrimental to those communities not only from a physical health perspective, but just as importantly, from a mental health and social consecutiveness perspective," Mr Dalrymple told ABC News. "Bowls Australia and our State and Territory Associations will be doing everything within our power to avoid the closing of any Bowls Clubs as a result of this pandemic."Bowls in search of the fountain of youthBowls clubs have struggled greatly in recent years. An injection of youth and a great presence in the community have been touted as key objectives to help revive the sport and its clubs. "Bowls Australia certainly isn't advocating for dramatic or drastic changes," Mr Dalrymple said. "But it is a great opportunity for clubs to attract new and younger members to their boards and committees to provide new innovative ideas to help grow clubs. "Now is a great time for clubs to try and increase our market share over the more dominating junior sports including netball, basketball, tennis and soccer."Emphasising the lack of contact in lawn bowls could be a major boost for the sport, according to one of the country's finest bowlers. Kristina Krstic is one of the younger members of the Australian international side and wants her sport to take advantage of the coronavirus shutdown. The 26-year-old from Western Australia has represented her country since she was 21 and sees an opportunity for a swarm of younger players to take up the game. "Placing emphasis on bowls being a "non-contact" sport may attract many families who may be hesitant to go back to contact sports," she said. "Kids have been missing out on the sporting aspects of their lives for almost a couple of months now so they may be interested in trying bowls while they aren't able to return to their usual sports."Preparations already underway across the boardMeasures to prepare sport and bowls clubs for the future were being prepared before the global health crisis. Deals with pay-television provider Foxtel, as well as coverage on SBS and Chanel 7 affiliate 7plus, was a step in the right direction, according to Ms Krstic. "I would definitely like to see this kind of exposure through media channels grow," she said. "Bowls' publicity on these channels is extremely important in regards to putting the sport out there and encouraging young people to take the sport up."But it is the measures at the local level which Mr Dalrymple told ABC were hoped to build clubs in their own communities. A marketing campaign launched in 2019 aimed at people aged between 30-50 is one of the newest measures to encourage new players to try the sport. "The campaign is reaching out to those looking for a team sport that's not inherently physically demanding in comparison to sports such as football and netball," he said. "Our campaign (named Local Legends Wanted) will be aired nationally in the coming months to help relaunch and reinvigorate bowls in Australia."Passion for the support needs to shine throughMs Krstic said the road back for bowls was going to be tough. "It's obviously a very difficult time for bowls clubs at the moment due to the loss of wages in response to COVID-19," she said. But a passionate base of players at clubs across the country will allow the sport to grow once rinks open up, according to Ms Krstic. "There are many existing members itching to get back to playing bowls which will help our bowls clubs grow when restrictions are relaxed," she said. "This moment in time could be a good opportunity for bowls clubs to "restart" and "rejuvenate", potentially by introducing bowls being played all year round"
The coronavirus new normal facing Australians in a world still gripped by pandemic
While Australia received its first major reprieve from COVID-19 restrictions this weekend, our lives are still a long way from what we once called normal. Key points:A Brisbane gym is enacting strict social distancing measuresMost pools are likely to remain closed as it's too costly to reopenCity eateries are reconfiguring their dining spaces to low patronageIndividuals and businesses have been forced to adapt, painting a stark picture of what life might be like in the post-pandemic world. If you are someone who sets your alarm early to exercise — even when gyms can open their doors — don't expect your workout experience to be the same as it was prior to COVID-19. Outdoor bootcamps are allowing personal trainers to keep their businesses alive for now, but gym owners are planning for the next phase. Joanne Johnson, who manages CrossFit Neuro in Brisbane, has already taped off areas to ensure her members are socially distant at all times. "Just going to know what their perimeter is to work out in a safe environment," Ms Johnson said. CrossFit Neuro is prepared to cap numbers of staff and members inside the gym. Athletes will soon have to sign into an allocated timeslot. "We won't be sharing really anything in the gym. Equipment will be allocated to a designated area that will be cleaned before and after," she said. Her members will also have their own cleaning equipment in their designated workout space. Booking systems will also help with contact tracing later down the track, should that ever be required. What about doing laps at the local pool?Many operators have admitted it's too costly to keep their facilities COVID-safe while they're restricted to allowing just 10 people in a pool at a time. Paying staff and extra cleaners, as well as heating costs, meant it was not viable for many local pools to reopen until restrictions are lifted further. Brisbane City Council said all 22 of its pools would remain closed "until further notice". A big hit is coming for investors as an end to interest-only home loans combines with coronavirus, experts warnLakes and lagoons are potentially the best option for the time being and SEQWater's Mike Foster said all its facilities were "very much back and open for business". He said policing social distancing would be an added responsibility for staff and park rangers for the foreseeable future. "In many ways we're asking the community to really manage themselves and self-police themselves," Mr Foster said. "It all makes common sense, we know if we do it, it gives us our best protection so there's plenty of ways to continue to enjoy the wonderful outdoors."It's business 'unusual' in the workplaceThe Commonwealth Bank is one major corporation that has kept about 80 per cent of its office staff working from home during COVID-19. That equates to about 20,000 people who will now begin a phased approach to returning to their offices. Those who are already working at the office are temperature-checked upon arrival. The bank has also been operating split teams that rotate between home and office since the pandemic began. Westpac has about 22,000 employees working from home. "Westpac is planning a phased approach for how employees can return to office locations safely over the coming weeks and months," a spokesperson told the ABC. Follow the red arrowed roadTica Hessing is a human geographer and tenant adviser at Cushman & Wakefield, based in Sydney. The commercial real estate company has developed a concept called the "Six Feet Office" and has spent the past week remodelling it. The space includes stickers on the floor indicating a 1.5-metre distance from desks and cubicles. There are even red arrows to encourage staff to move around the office in a clockwise direction, to help people avoid bumping into one another. "It's not only about the physical workplace, but it also helps with changing the behaviour of people in the workplace," Ms Hessing said. The office innovations were the brainchild of their colleagues in the Netherlands and were put into action to ensure more staff could safely work in close proximity. "We have the sneeze guards in place so that people can actually sit opposite each other," Ms Hessing said. How about lunch with a colleague?Before coronavirus, Perth's Yagan Square was a mecca for business workers at lunchtime. Shy John Brewery & Yum Cha has been closed since March, but is reopening with a hostess who will advise patrons about the restaurant's strict new protocols before they dine in. The venue can hold up to 300 people, but the biggest change is restricting patronage to no more than 20 guests at a time. General manager Justin Lim said they had redesigned the layout to ensure social distancing between guests and staff for the foreseeable future. "But it'll be up to our team, predominantly our host and the managers on duty together, to make sure that we work in line with those guidelines as well," he said. Mr Lim said guests would also be temperature-checked and that returning workers would notice big changes to the restaurant's operation. "The scheduling side of things, the kitchen operation, our menu, has to be minimised to be able to make it work, otherwise it's just not going to be cost-effective," he said. Kuan Sub Lee, who owns the Gangnam restaurant nearby, said the new restrictions, while far from business as usual, were a necessity. "I was building my customers and I feel like I have to do it again," he said. The 'new norm' for the 'foreseeable future'Michael Kidd from the Federal Government team assisting with the COVID-19 response said while a roadmap to recovery had been provided, it would be up to individual businesses to make their own plans for the months ahead. "Each business will need to look at what they're doing and look at the guidance which is being provided and then decide how does that apply to our business," Professor Kidd said. "Where people are coming into work [it's about] making sure that not everyone is coming in at the same time, so that we don't have crowding in the areas where people come in and out of the business."Staggered starts and flexible working arrangements have been recommended, as well as continuing to have staff work remotely where possible. "It will be for the foreseeable future because we don't know how long we're going to be living with COVID-19 in Australia," he said. "So, the measures that are put in place now are probably going to be measures which we need to continue to follow for many, many months."
Staff, residents in the clear at Rockhampton aged care home where nurse tested positive to coronavirus
More than 200 staff and residents at an aged care home have tested negative for coronavirus after a nurse earlier tested positive, sparking a COVID-19 emergency at the Rockhampton facility. Key points:Staff and residents at the North Rockhampton Nursing Centre have tested negative to coronavirusThe circumstances prior to a nurse testing positive are under investigationThe daughter of one resident says she heard about the nurse testing positive in the mediaQueensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said 235 people at the facility had tested negative, with another 37 results to do. Earlier, 35 residents from the North Rockhampton Nursing Centre had been relocated to the Mater and Hillcrest private hospitals as testing got underway. Plans to move the elderly residents were announced by Deputy Premier and Health Minister Steven Miles after an Enrolled Nurse at the facility tested positive for COVID-19 on Thursday night, more than 10 days after she is believed to have become contagious. The home was placed into lockdown. The incident sparked fears of a repeat of Newmarch House, the Sydney coronavirus cluster that has seen the deaths of 16 aged residents and 69 infections. In a statement, Queensland Health said moving the residents would ensure those who may have been in contact with the infected staff member could be appropriately isolated for the required isolation period. Nurse went to work after being testedThe nurse, who is understood to have been working at a reception desk and not in direct contact with residents while she had symptoms, is now in isolation. The Central Queensland Hospital and Health Service says the circumstances prior to the positive diagnosis are under investigation because she was onsite after being symptomatic and after being sent for testing. How the nurse became infected is still unknown, but tracing is underway to track her movements after a trip to Brisbane before she became sick. Queensland Chief Health Officer Jeannette Young said the nurse had an "essential purpose" to travel to Brisbane but she had been left "speechless" that some people were still not following warnings to say at home while unwell. "She wasn't providing hands-on care to the residents which is a good thing, but she did have contact with people which is why we're being extremely cautious."Dr Young urged all residents in Rockhampton who had "any symptoms" to step forward to be tested and said a second fever clinic would be opened in the central Queensland town today. She said the nurse had been out in the community during that time and it was impossible to trace everyone. Meanwhile, a new fever clinic at the CQ University, north of Rockhampton, will be open from 9am-4pm seven days a week to help cope with more requests for testing. Resident's daughter heard news on TVThe daughter of one 95-year-old resident at the Rockhampton aged care home said she found out about the health scare from a TV news report. Cathy Garvie's 95-year-old mum, Beryl Goddy, lives in the Ivy Baker Ward at the North Rockhampton Nursing Centre, which is the wing at the focus of the scare. "I was watching ABC 24 News and I saw it come up there," she said. "I think they [the centre] had lots more things to think about than worrying about us. They had the patients to think about and everything."Ms Garvie said she had visited her mum on Thursday, the day the nurse was diagnosed. "You had to buzz to be let in and then they listed all the symptoms, 'did you have all these?', and then they took our temperature," she said. "I've always taken all precautions with it. I always wear a hand-made mask when I visit the unit and I clean my hands as I go in and I clean mum's as we go [outside]."Ms Garvie is now in isolation waiting for her own coronavirus test results. "I feel well and my temperature has been 35 for the last few tests I've had over the last couple of weeks," she said. "I have every confidence in the staff there, so I haven't really been that worried. "I've rung them up and wished them all the best and got updates on how everything is going."What are the state guidelines?Jeanette Young issued an aged care direction as a result of the coronavirus public health emergency. Anyone visiting a Queensland aged care facility must have an up-to-date influenza vaccinationUp to two people can visit for a maximum of two hours on a particular dayAnyone providing essential goods, health, medical or pharmaceutical services can enterVisitors are permitted for end-of-life supportAnyone who has returned from overseas in the past 14 days, had contact with a confirmed case, or has any symptoms cannot visitChildren under 16 cannot visit unless it is for end-of-life support
India's coronavirus lockdown: The good, the bad and the ugly of Narendra Modi's COVID-19 measures
India is in no man's land. Thousands of confirmed COVID-19 cases are being added every day to the national tally, but it's not enough to guarantee disaster is on the horizon. Around a third of all coronavirus cases have recovered and the death rate is relatively low, but victory is not yet in sight. Health experts have continued to say just a few more days of lockdown would give a clearer picture of where the country is headed, but after more than six weeks there's still no answer. India has now surged past 90,000 confirmed cases and is recording more than 4,000 new cases a day. It has also passed China's tally. And yet the country, groaning under huge internal economic and social pressure, is easing restrictions to get the economy moving again. Interstate trains are resuming operations to get poor migrant workers back home, posing a real risk of spreading the coronavirus to rural areas where medical services are poorest. So how did it get here? And why, after six weeks of one of the world's strictest lockdowns, is the country still in such an uncertain position? Here's what we know. The Good: Early lockdown measuresSix weeks ago, I wrote that India was doing relatively OK, especially compared to Australia. I made the assessment not only because the number of confirmed cases was low, but because India was acting in an assertive and confident manner that appeared to be lacking in the west. Australia was in the midst of a panic buying frenzy as numbers jumped, and policy-makers were flipflopping about mass gatherings — such as Formula One or rugby league — while India was shutting down borders, schools, cricket matches, and even Bollywood, in what seemed to be a methodical fashion. Then India imposed one of the world's strictest lockdowns, when confirmed cases of the coronavirus had just passed 500. Almost everything, except essential services and businesses that related to food or medicine, was shut, causing a sudden shift in community sentiment — as if confirmed cases had shot up. But along with some unease, there was also a sense of national pride. India, it seemed, was tackling the issue head on. "India started off reasonably well," said the Public Health Foundation of India's Professor K Shrinath Reddy. "India did take several measures that were fairly effective and ahead of many of the western countries."According to researchers at Oxford University, who have rated the strength of lockdowns across the world from zero to 100 using a "stringency index", India's lockdown scored the highest rating of 100. In comparison Australia — which at the time had four times the confirmed cases — scored 63. And even when Australia had the same number of cases as India, its lockdown measures scored 34. "There was a great sense of vulnerability, because of the large population and the overcrowded slums and cities," Professor Reddy said. "As well as the relatively weak health system, and the frightening images of overwhelmed health systems and hospitals coming in from Europe and North America. "That led to the decision that we must have a lockdown, and there was not much resistance to the lockdown from the general public."The Good: Extraordinary humane social responseIndia's measures suppressed the curve and hospitals have not been inundated as many had feared, although experts have suggested the country's young demographic is likely to have helped the latter. "If you look at deaths per million, we are way, way low down," Professor Reddy said. "1.27 deaths per million population compared to 700 plus in Belgium and more than 200 in Europe, and close to 200 in the US."Many of India's cases are concentrated in a few metropolitan areas and hotspot clusters, which have been quarantined, while more than 40 per cent of India's regional and municipal districts — accounting for a quarter of the population — have been labelled "green zones". This means they have not had a confirmed case of the coronavirus for at least 21 days. The southern state of Kerala, a region renowned for quality health care and high literacy rates, was the first state to register cases of COVID-19 and of the more than 500 confirmed cases its had since, only about 30 are still active. It has become the envy of India after it responded to initial cases with rapid testing, contact-tracing, clear communication to combat false rumours, and even home delivered meals for school children stuck at home. But according to Professor Reddy, the situation across India can't be characterised in a "unitary fashion". "The southern states, especially Kerala, had an extraordinarily efficient public health response, as well as a humane social response," he said. The Bad: Not enough testing and 'PPE not being available to everyone'While India's aggressive lockdown and social distancing measures were praised by the World Health Organization, the country's initial response was lacking in another crucial area: testing. Its testing regime focused on those with symptoms who had been contact with a confirmed case, or who had travelled to a hotspot country, but it's now evident asymptomatic cases were slipping through the country's defences. "No lockdown can be 100 per cent foolproof," renowned public health expert Anant Bhan said. "People were allowed to go out and get milk, to get groceries, to buy vegetables and there were cases, for example, where that was the source of infection [or] sometimes it was through delivery of food, like pizza delivery."Home to more than 1.3 billion people, India's testing regime per capita was always likely to rate low — although it has increased the number of daily tests from around 5,000 in late March to just under 100,000. The country appears to now be paying the price for its slow start. "We never really knew how much it had spread in the community prior to the lockdown and during the lockdown," Dr Bhan said. "A lot of police and health care workers got infected because the infected ended up being asymptomatic as well."The state of Maharastra and particularly its capital Mumbai, the country's financial and entertainment capital, has been the hardest hit, accounting for a third of all coronavirus cases. Hundreds of neighbourhoods in Mumbai have been turned into containment zones, where residents cannot leave. More than a 1,000 cases have been recorded in Asia’s largest slum, Dharavi, where social distancing is near impossible to maintain. Hospitals last week ran out of beds for critically ill patients , and at least 15 hospitals have been partially or fully placed into quarantine, after doctors and nurses became infected. According to Dr Bahn, there were a few reasons behind this, including "poor quality personal protective equipment or PPE not being available to everyone". "Bhilwara is a city in southern Rajasthan where the infection spread was traced to a hospital, a very busy hospital," Dr Bhan said. "Probably, a patient came in and infected the [health care] providers, and they ended up spreading it to patients."The Ugly: Millions of migrant workers left without an incomeWhen India's lockdown was announced, Prime Minister Narendra Modi gave just four hours' notice, leaving millions of migrant workers who live hand-to-mouth without an income or a bed as factories and construction sites closed down. Lines of young men desperately trying to walk hundreds of kilometres to their home town or village, without food or water, became a common sight in Delhi and other cities during the early days of the lockdown, while those left behind were turned into beggars. "It's worse than I ever imagined," journalist Saba Naqvi said. "They were proud people. Many of these people work with their hands — they have been reduced to a condition where they have to beg for food."It prompted Mr Modi to apologise to the poor for causing "immense suffering" and the Government to announce huge relief packages and set up quarantined accommodation for migrant workers. But it remained on the backfoot. At least 47 people have died due to starvation, 26 to exhaustion, and 83 to suicide due to lockdown hardship, according to a study by a group of academics and activists. Last week, 16 migrant workers were crushed to death after falling asleep on train tracks as they tried to get home. Many have defended the Government's snap decision to impose a lockdown, saying migrant workers would have exited cities en masse anyway, elevating the risk of the virus spreading. But Professor Reddy is doubtful. "The migrants, because of the nature of their occupations and the places of their stay, would have had very little exposure to the virus," he said. "They could have been assisted in returning home."The Ugly: A mass event and Islamophobic fake newsThe ferocity of the coronavirus's ability to spread became clear after an outbreak at a congregation of supporters of the Sunni Islamic movement, Tablighi Jamaat, in defiance of the city's restrictions on mass gatherings. It prompted anger to again start mounting towards Muslims, just weeks after deadly violence erupted between Muslims and Hindu nationalists in the nation's capital. Islamophobic rumours started taking off on social media, and Muslim workers and street vendors were being chastised. "When the event broke out, we immediately knew what was to follow," said journalist Archis Chowdhury, who authored a study on fake news for factcheck website Boom Live. "We were doing one fact check every day about a rumour that was targeting Muslims with false allegations of spreading coronavirus purposefully."Chowdhury said a video showing a couple of Muslim youths licking plates "went viral [falsely claiming] Muslims are spreading their spit and the coronavirus with it". "It's a very old video from 2018 and it's of the Dawoodi Bohra community, who have this practice of licking their plates clean to avoid wastage of food," he said. So what's next for India?India may be at a crucial turning point, but it will have to make many more manoeuvrers in coming weeks and months. "It is absolutely improper to start marking [how India is going] at this stage," Professor Reddy said. "We've seen how South Korea has had a setback; we've seen how Singapore has had a setback. "We have to mark stage by stage and start learning. How fast a learner you are, and how fast you apply those learnings, is going to be important. "Now comes the big challenge."
Coronavirus and social distancing have changed my relationships — how can I make it permanent?
A few weeks ago, at the end of a video call with a friend who works at Tamworth Hospital, we were saying our goodbyes and I told him: "I love you". This expression of tenderness was not a first for our friendship, however, the manner in which it was received — earnestly reciprocated and not deflected with a joke or a melodramatic reply — was. This sincere desire for closeness has manifested itself again and again in conversations with the men in my life, leading me to me hope that perhaps one of the unintended positive consequences of the COVID-19 crisis is that it may help us redraw the socially acceptable limits of masculinity. To say that this new-found sensitivity has taken me by surprise would be an understatement. Australian masculinity is kind of like a VB ad: there are almost imperceptible changes over time, but the underlying theme remains the same. You need only look to the archetypes of our national identity — the swagman, the ANZAC, the battler, Ned Kelly, Crocodile Dundee — to see that we have historically defined ourselves through a lens of rugged, stoic masculinity in which men avoid overt displays of emotion lest it undermine their self-image of toughness and laid-back larrikinism. But what if the pandemic is an opportunity for Australians to rethink our rigid ideas of what it means to be a man — for the better?A more caring way of being a manThe crisis has forced us to collectively re-evaluate fundamental aspects not just of our own lives but society as a whole. The social isolation we're experiencing has made many of us grapple with our interconnectedness and, in particular, how to maintain social bonds while we're physically apart. The lingering spectre of death and disease is a constant reminder of the things we can no longer take for granted, including our loved ones. With these uplifting thoughts in mind, in late March I resolved to start telling the people I care about how much they mean to me, and one major change I've noticed is that the men in my life are suddenly more willing to open up about their feelings and be vulnerable in a way they previously wouldn't have. And, it turns out, I might not be the only one. "There has been a trend [among men] towards more openness and authentic models of friendship in recent years, where genuine trust and closeness are valued," says Associate Professor Steven Roberts, who studies men and masculinity at Monash University. "The lockdown offers the possibility for an expansion of these behaviours."Men whose idea of maintaining friendship previously extended as far as texting "Pub tonight?" every few months are suddenly teeing up virtual coffee dates weeks in advance to candidly discuss their mental health. Social isolation, says Roberts, "is forcing us all to confront our need for intimacy, it's making clear we are all vulnerable."That's not to say this disruption will result only in positive changes. According to Associate Professor Michael Flood, who researches men, masculinities and violence prevention at Queensland University of Technology, crises such as pandemics can completely upend traditional gender roles. For example, the HIV-AIDS crisis in Africa "took such a profound toll that it interrupted many men's ability to be the breadwinners," Flood says, "either because economies collapsed or because of other rapid economic changes". As conventionally "masculine" norms became harder to embody, he says, "some men responded to the loss of that traditional male power through backlash. That is, there were increases in domestic and sexual violence against women."While we don't yet know exactly how the COVID-19 pandemic will affect the rate and severity of violence in Australia, some frontline workers are already reporting an increase in requests for help from victims of domestic violence. And a UN Women report published last month found that violence against women has intensified around the world since the outbreak of COVID-19. However, the potential for an increase in men's violence as a result of factors like economic upheaval and unemployment is by no means guaranteed, which is why a re-evaluation of what it means to be a man in our society is so necessary. Flood says there has been much greater community awareness and discussion about the "value of care and care work" in recent weeks. This "greater valuing of human mutuality, interdependence and community as key means of surviving ... and supporting each other through this pandemic", he says, has the potential to change our conception of manhood. For example, while women are still shouldering the majority of caring responsibilities, the Workplace Gender Equality Agency has found men are taking on more care and domestic work as a result of flexible working arrangements necessitated by the COVID-19 crisis. This slight redistribution of domestic labour represents an opportunity to value a new, more caring way of being a man. According to Roberts though, some pockets of society seem to have reverted to "old social norms". "Some have called this the return of the 1950s housewife, with women undertaking the large bulk of domestic duties and caring responsibilities, including home schooling," he says. What might a new, modern masculinity look like?Even if lockdown does lead to positive changes to gender roles, is it possible to maintain them post-pandemic? And if so, what might a new, modern masculinity look like?"There are opportunities [for men] to develop deep and profound empathy in this current crisis ... but whether we can sustain it is unclear," says Roberts. "One thing we can do as individuals and as a society is more overtly celebrate deviations from traditional masculine norms."Whether that's opening up about our feelings, prioritising a healthier work-life balance, or initiating housework without expecting praise, there are numerous ways men can start redefining masculinity for themselves. "A big difference is having a personal experience of a different life, a different way of living," says Flood — which is exactly what COVID-19 has given many of us. My personal experience is that there is a genuine desire among men to forge a more caring conception of masculinity. In the past two months I've seen previously stoic men break down over their anxieties about what the future holds. I've listened to them intently describe their newly discovered closeness with their children and disclose that, when this is all over, they don't want to go back to the way things were. There is a profound relief to be found in no longer trying to embody an unattainable idea of manliness, in loving and allowing yourself to be loved, in admitting that everything's not alright at a time when it so obviously isn't. Letting people know how you feel, asking for help when you need it — being vulnerable — isn't weakness, it requires strength. Which is why I'm vowing to keep telling the men in my life that I love them, and I encourage others to do the same, not just for our own sake but for that of the people around us. Because we can get it Skypin', we can get it typin', we can get it callin' our mates, a new-found masculinity needs a big old crisis and the best old crisis is COVID. COVID-19. We can get it carin', we can get it sharin', we can get it makin' a vow, matter of fact I've got it now.
Cruise ship coronavirus outbreaks have forced the industry to make drastic changes
Cruise ships have been linked to hundreds of cases of coronavirus across the country, but some Australians are keen to get back on board as soon as possible. Key points:Temperature checks and fewer passengers could be part of the changesSome companies are offering tickets on cruises for SeptemberTourism Minister says there are no guarantees when cruising will be allowed to resumeHowever, a holiday on the high seas will look drastically different when ships are allowed to again set sail. The industry is working on new health protocols that could include temperature testing and a reduction in the number of passengers allowed onboard. Cruise Lines International Association represents the major cruise companies and its Australasia managing director, Joel Katz, said the industry was figuring out how to operate in a world with no COVID-19 vaccine. "This virus really thrives in social situations — there is nothing more social than a cruise," he said. Changes to every aspect of cruising are currently being considered in an attempt to convince governments it could start up again in a way that would not lead to hundreds of infections. Mr Katz conceded there was no quick fix and all options were on the table. "[That includes] the health questionnaires that [passengers] will be required to fill in, the screening, testing, every aspect of the onboard operation including the onboard medical capabilities all the way through to when the guest gets home," he said. Changes to how guests interact are also being examined and could include reducing the number of passengers allowed in theatres and offering more meal sitting times so tables and chairs can be better spaced. Cruising this year? Depends who you askThe industry was shut down as coronavirus spread across the world, with high levels of infections connected to ships that docked on the east and west coast of Australia. Just months later, some operators are planning on setting sail in September and are offering special deals to lure customers. But Deputy Chief Medical Officer Nick Coatsworth has made it clear Australians should not be booking such a holiday yet. "There will be an opportunity and time to consider whether cruise ships are the right place to go, but I would suggest it is too early at this point in time," he said. That medical advice is not deterring Australians, though, with many booking tickets for travel in coming months. Kathy Pavlidis manages Travel Associates in Kew, Victoria, and said customers loyal to particular cruise lines were already planning international trips. "I've had five bookings just this week and they can't wait to get back on board," she said. Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham urged Australians not to book holidays that are currently banned. "There are no guarantees about when any of the activities will restart," he told the ABC. "Certainly no guarantees about international travel and definitely no guarantees about international cruise shipping."Tourism during uncertain timesCruises are just one part of Australia's tourism industry, which is in the process of developing new rules for operators to follow while COVID-19 remains a threat. Tourism and Transport Forum chief executive officer Margy Osmond said it was about providing clarity during uncertain times. "Everything from what social distancing looks like on a tour bus, what are the sort of provisions you need to put in place in a theatre or art gallery, potentially what it looks like when people go camping again," she said. "Over the next few weeks you will see some more standard views from across the industry about what's thought to be the baseline. "We hope that will make governments and consumers feel more confident about all of their travel options."Ms Osmond said COVID-19 provided an opportunity for tourist operators to think outside the box and suggested the cruise industry could offer more trips within Australian waters if health authorities approved the move. "Once the state borders open it's not impossible that we will start seeing cruise options around Australia in the last quarter of this year," she said. Mr Katz said cruise operators will consider putting on more local trips while international travel remains banned for Australians. "I would expect we will see more domestic or possible regional itinerary options in that initial start up phase," he said. But do not expect the Tourism Minister to get behind the idea. Senator Birmingham said he would rather people stay onshore. "The most important focus of our tourism recovery will be on attracting visitors to stay in our towns, supporting Australian businesses to get back on their feet," he said. "I will be urging them [Australians] to firstly get in their cars and drive across regional Australia wherever they can and when we get to point state borders are opened, to hopefully get on planes and head to some of the other great destinations around the country."
Coronavirus lockdown helps keep space in ICU for chronically ill people like me
I know many of you are finding lockdown challenging: negotiating appropriate backgrounds for Zoom meetings, supervising kids' lessons, baking up a storm. Like you, we are missing time with family and friends. But we have something extra to contend with. In January 2013, when I was 43 and our daughter Kimi was six, I received the shocking diagnosis of motor neurone disease (MND). I was a seemingly healthy academic, a swimmer and runner, an active parent and partner, a hugging friend. Now, my body is completely paralysed, except for my face. A ventilator pushes air in and out of a tube in my neck to keep me alive. I cannot speak. I communicate with a NeuroNode strapped to my wrist, cleverly transmitting my tiny muscle twitches as signals to my phone. On the plus side this means I am not at risk of touching my face with corona-coated fingers. But it also means that my family and I are more vulnerable than most to COVID-19, and not just because of my weakened body's inherent susceptibility. We are more vulnerable because I am dependent on a team of carers to do everything for me — from hoisting me out of bed to wiping my eyes (and arse), from feeding me lunch to suctioning my airway clear, from keeping my machines running to repositioning sore joints at 3:00am. It's impossible to be isolated with this team of nine carers who work shifts in our home, or to keep two metres away from the people who are washing my "charm"-pits or tipping condensation from the tube that pushes air in and out of my lungs. The absence of paid sick leave that is a shitty fact of life for casual workers becomes a dangerous disincentive to staying away and waiting to be tested if they develop symptoms. And it's best not to contemplate what would happen if infection of a team member or their contact necessitated all of us quarantining. I have learnt to appreciate the 'gift of life'Like others in the MND community I am particularly grateful for the work Australians have done in flattening the curve. I want ICU beds to be available not only for the people with COVID-19 who need them, but for others needing hospital care to give them a shot at staying alive. I have been one of those people several times in my seven years with MND, sometimes with a little notice, such as when I had a supra pubic catheter inserted just before I lost the capacity to stand up from the loo, even with (generous) help; more often catapulted in by a respiratory crisis. My most recent ICU "holiday" started with losing six hours to near-fatal carbon dioxide narcosis, continued with a life-saving tracheotomy and laryngectomy, and finished with a long, slow period of recruiting and training carers. That nine-and-a-half months in ICU, along with my years living with MND, have turned out to be good preparation for the current restrictions. I have learnt to appreciate the gift of life, to find pleasure in small things, to accept the derailment of plans, to adapt, to live in the present, to be grateful for (immense) kindness, to connect with others online, to cope with loss of control, to try to make the most of each day, to forgive myself when I stuff up, to welcome help, to laugh, to manage confinement (in my hospital bed, my immobile body), to trust, to view modest outings as a treat, to enjoy the life of the mind, to know how wonderful it is to be home with my beautiful, beloved family. Spare a thought for those just diagnosedThis month we celebrate MND week. Normally we gather, a community united in hope and remembrance. We participate in MND awareness campaigns and fundraising walks; we sell and wear cornflowers. This year, there are virtual gatherings and events, such as Cornflower Blue Day and Australia Moves 4 MND. I am lucky that this is my eighth MND week since my diagnosis. Typically people live two or three years, many for less. My heart goes out to those dealing with recent MND diagnosis — a mortality rate of 100 per cent, not one or two per cent — in this time of isolation. Please spare a thought for those trying to process this devastating news now, having only the screen version of health professionals like my fabulous neurologist, Professor Dominic Rowe. They are having to forgo closeness and hugs when they are most needed, and missing out on what might be their last opportunities to swim or work or go to the pub or attend family weddings or travel, making memories for their kids in the shadow of what will become our global collective memory. They're also unable to meet face-to-face with other people with MND or MND association advisers, contemplating death at a time when the number of mourners allowed at funerals is limited. Thank youAs a potential beneficiary, I say a heartfelt 'thank you' to everyone making sacrifices to flatten the curve. Thank you to our political leaders working together to make difficult decisions. Thank you to our dedicated healthcare workers for doing what you can to minimise mortality: I hope you can stay safe. Thank you to health communicators and broadcasters for keeping us informed. Thanks to essential workers for providing care, teaching, producing food, making masks, delivering pizza, researching, selling toilet paper, troubleshooting technology, first-responding, collecting garbage and more. Thank you to those who are finding themselves or their businesses reliant on or ineligible for welfare: I sincerely hope our taxes are raised and our safety net is widened and permanently strengthened. Thank you to comedians, musicians, dancers, writers and actors for spreading joy. And a huge thank you to everyone who's being kind to those around them, washing their hands and keeping their distance.
Relaxation of coronavirus restrictions at SA restaurants and pubs brought forward
Alcohol will be back on the menu at South Australian restaurants and cafes from Friday, as the State Government brings forward the relaxation of some coronavirus restrictions. The change will see restaurants will be able to seat up to 20 patrons — 10 indoor and 10 outdoor. South Australia's previous restriction roadmap contemplated restaurants only allowing 10 outdoor diners, with no alcohol until June 8. Now, pubs and clubs will be permitted to open on June 5, the Saturday of the Queen's Birthday long weekend. South Australia has had just one case of coronavirus detected in the past 28 days.
Coronavirus shutdown could be responsible for decrease in sexually transmitted infection rates in the ACT
No parties, no pubs, no smooching with a stranger and definitely no one night stands. COVID-19 has undoubtedly had a huge impact on the sex lives of Australians. But while the world has been consumed with the trajectory of one kind of virus, some sexual health clinicians are quietly pleased with the mellowing out of another. In the ACT, there was a 52 per cent reduction in the number of people testing positive to gonorrhoea in April, compared to the average of the past five years. And, following a national trend, there was a 34 per cent decrease in the recorded cases of chlamydia. Although we do not have a full picture of the data yet, experts say the pandemic could be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to drive down the rates of sexually transmitted infections (STIs). "Nationally, that data won't be available for quite some time," Canberra Sexual Health Centre director Sarah Martin said. "But we've all worked very hard to reduce the spread of COVID-19. And for some people, this might also have meant less partying with casual sex, less chance of infection. "I think we've had an opportunity to slow down."Dr Martin's clinic, along with many others, have changed the way they do regular sexual health check-ups during COVID-19. Patients have been asked to phone ahead for an initial assessment, and only those considered high risk have had face-to-face appointments. That might be skewing the data — with fewer people to test, the lab could be returning different results. But Dr Martin said it was likely at least some of the reduction in cases was because of what was effectively an enforced period of celibacy. Now is the chance to break the chain of infectionDr Martin said she was aware that a lot of people were keen to get their sex lives back on track once coronavirus restrictions eased further. That is why she is urging people to get their STI tests now, even if they have no symptoms. "Some people might not feel they need testing now. Others might have decided to delay testing for a while. And others again, might have found it more difficult to access testing than usual," Dr Martin said. "[But] now it's an opportunity to think through how to stay safe."ACT Labor politician Tara Cheyne agreed with Dr Martin, and said getting tested was a no brainer. Last year Ms Cheyne told the ACT Legislative Assembly that she contracted chlamydia at age 21, in a speech calling for action to reduce the stigma around sexually transmitted diseases. "It was incredibly straightforward, it wasn't a big deal," Ms Cheyne said. "What would have been a big deal is if I didn't get tested and if I didn't get treated."Ms Cheyne also agreed that there is no better time to get tested than now. "I think there's probably something almost a little bit sexy in itself about being confident in your own mind and of your own health, that you are STI free," she added. "For many STIs the treatments are very simple. It can be as simple as taking one or two tablets and waiting a week."Dating could forever be differentThe return to what has been dubbed 'regency-era courtship' by those in the dating game has led to many a meme, and many first dates have been conducted via video chat during the coronavirus pandemic. Sexologist Kym Robinson said that, while she was not sure all her single clients had been following the strict physical distancing restrictions, she was hopeful the focus COVID-19 placed on infectious diseases would transfer to safe sex practices and prevention of STIs. "We're talking a lot more about social distancing and ways of protecting ourselves like hand washing. I'm hoping that people are going to put a little bit more thought into safer sex practices," Mrs Robinson said. "Perhaps I'm a little optimistic, but I'm hoping that's going to then transfer onto the STI rates."While it might be anxiety inducing to have safe-sex conversations with potential partners in a post-shutdown world, Mrs Robinson said it is better than the alternative. "If you don't get checked, those are actually more tricky conversations," she said. "Imagine how much more difficult it'll be later, when you say we need to use a condom because I have something that I don't want you to catch."
Victorian health officials access coronavirus patient's COVIDSafe app data for first time
Victorian health officials have accessed a coronavirus patient's COVIDSafe app data for the first time. Key points:Health officials on Monday identified that a Victorian who tested positive to coronavirus had downloaded and registered the appIt is the first time Victorian health authorities have made use of the app and the first publicly announced use of the app in AustraliaThe coronavirus patient gave consent for the data on the app to be downloadedThe Federal Government smartphone application records when users have been in proximity to other smartphones with the app to help authorities track down people who may have been exposed to the virus. A Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) spokesperson said a coronavirus positive patient who had the COVIDSafe app registered on their phone was identified on Monday. It is the first time Victorian health officials have been able to make use of the app. However, it is not known if other app users have been in the proximity of the user who contracted COVID-19. The Federal Health Department has refused to say whether the app had already been used elsewhere in the country however it was the first publicly announced use of the app. The DHHS spokesperson said the patient gave consent to health authorities to use the data on their phone, which was downloaded to look for potential contacts. "Access is strictly limited to trained public health officers carrying out contact tracing functions," the spokesperson said. "Victoria has legislated privacy obligations when handling citizens’ private data or health data and these obligations will be adhered to. "With only a small number of cases in Victoria, there have been few opportunities to use the app so far. "We hope this continues."How does the COVIDSafe app work?The COVIDSafe app relies on Bluetooth to detect other users of the app that are within range. When it detects another user, it exchanges an encrypted packet of information containing the name, age range, postcode, mobile number, date and time and Bluetooth signal strength of the contacts. That data is stored on a user's phone for up to 21 days. If a user tests positive for COVID-19, they can upload their stored contacts to a central repository held by the federal Health Department. That data is then made available to state health authorities for contact tracing.
Could Australia expand its proposed coronavirus travel bubble to the Pacific Islands? Here's what you need to know
In Fiji, pristine bungalows sit empty, sparkling resort pools have no-one swimming in them and thousands of employees who would usually be on hand to greet tourists with wide smiles have been left without work. While COVID-19 has shut down the Pacific Island country's biggest industry, Fiji hopes it won't be for too much longer. The Government wants to see Australian and New Zealand tourists return "as soon as possible" and is pushing hard to become part of the "travel bubble" the two countries are planning. So, when could Australians be back sunning themselves on a beach in Fiji, what are the risks and benefits of reopening borders in the region and what do other Pacific Island countries think of the "travel bubble" idea?Should I start saving for a ticket to Fiji?While discussions between Australia, New Zealand and Fiji are underway, there is still no timeframe on when travel to Fiji, or other pacific island countries, could resume. But Federal Liberal MP and co-convenor of the Parliamentary Friends of the Pacific Group Dave Sharma told the Lowy Institute we could see travel resume to some Pacific Island countries this year. "I'd be hesitant to put a timetable on it, but I expect towards the end of this year — 2020," he said,"I would think we should have some parameters in place that would be allowing us to commence this sort of thing and possibly even sooner."Australia and New Zealand have made it clear that re-establishing travel between themselves is their initial priority, and even that could be some months away. Once we have established travel arrangements across the Tasman, Prime Minister Scott Morrison has also said we will "explore opportunities to expand the concept to members of our broader Pacific family". But all countries are being very cautious in their approach — they want to be confident the risk of spreading COVID-19 from Australia and New Zealand into Pacific Island countries is mitigated, especially because they so far seem to have avoided the worst of coronavirus. The Fijian Government has formally requested to join the bubble and behind the scenes, the country is seen as a frontrunner among Pacific Island countries because of its interest, its tourism industry and its experience with COVID-19. However, Fiji's Attorney General Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum says "these decisions aren't made overnight". "We've obviously put our hand up, we want to look at how we can place ourselves in a more prime position," he said. How would the arrangement work?Australia's High Commissioner to Fiji, John Feakes, said the "hard work" in terms of creating travel arrangements will be hashed out by Australia and New Zealand in the initial stages of the bubble. "Once the work has been done to open up the Trans-Tasman bubble, we will look very quickly to include Fiji in that as well," he said. "But our principal concern is to make sure that the health of New Zealanders, Australians and Fijians is protected."Medical and health considerations will be at the forefront, but issues such as travel insurance, quarantine and testing measures and whether tourists are restricted to certain areas of countries, all need to be agreed upon. Australia and New Zealand have started an expert panel to look at protocols for Trans-Tasman travel and there have been some calls to include Pacific Island stakeholders in the discussions. What about concerns over spreading COVID-19?The ability to trace and respond to potential cases of COVID-19 will also be a consideration. Seemingly in response to this, Fiji is about to start a trial of its own version of the coronavirus tracing app. Mr Sayed-Khaiyum said the country is "feeling good" about how it has responded to the coronavirus, through contact-tracing and lockdowns. It has recorded 18 cases of COVID-19, but no new cases in the past four weeks. But its testing rate is still well below Australia and New Zealand, and there are some early concerns about how effective the app will be in the country. The numbers of COVID-19 cases have been equally steady in most Pacific Island countries, but there is a push to increase antibody testing in the region to ensure cases aren't being missed. Australia, New Zealand and the World Health Organisation are currently delivering almost 100 000 GeneXpert testing cartridges to Pacific Island countries. Pacific countries have experienced devastation from introduced diseases in the past, most recently when measles killed more than 80 people in Samoa. In the face of their vulnerabilities, most acted quickly to protect themselves from COVID-19 and they'll be careful not to jeopardise that now. What do other Pacific Island countries think of the 'travel bubble'?While Fiji has been the most forthcoming about wanting to be included in the "travel bubble," other countries across the region have had different reactions. Vanuatu has confirmed it has had talks with Australia about the idea. While its economy is also heavily reliant on tourism, it has been incredibly cautious about reopening its borders given it has not recorded any cases of COVID-19 so far. The Cook Islands, another tourism dependent economy, has expressed interest in reopening borders. Other Pacific Island countries that haven't recorded any cases, especially those with smaller tourism industries, have also expressed some hesitation. But a Pacific bubble is about more than just providing beaches for Australians and New Zealanders to sun themselves on. It could provide new trade opportunities in the region and reopen travel for Pacific workers who visit Australia and New Zealand under specific labour schemes. Papua New Guinea Prime Minister James Marape said he had held discussions with his Australian counterpart about the travel bubble between Australia and New Zealand. "We're sensitive to those discussions, but Mr Morrison has told me they kept Pacific Islands out of discussions simply because most have almost nil presence of COVID-19," he said. PNG's borders will remain closed until at least the start of June, but its national airline has continued flying to Australia throughout the lockdown period, to collect freight. Mr Marpae said he told Mr Morrison PNG is developing a "protocol on international travel". The Secretary General of the Pacific Islands Forums, Dame Meg Taylor, said several Pacific countries had approached New Zealand and Australia about being included in the bubble. She told an Asia Society Policy Institute event that while everyone wants to see things reopen, it will "take time" and the first priority "is that people stay healthy". "We just don't have strong health systems, health services and health infrastructure," Dame Meg said. "If you're going to open up, you've got to have some kind of security there so that anyone coming into your country, and your citizens as well, feel secure enough that they will be taken care of if there is a case that comes into the country."So why is Fiji so eager to join?Tourism is the country's biggest industry, bringing in about $1.37 billion ($2 billion Fijian) and accounting for 35 per cent of GDP, and Australians and New Zealanders account for about 75 per cent of Fiji's tourists. But no-one has been coming to the country since it closed its borders at the end of March, to protect against the coronavirus. As a result, as many as 100,000 people are thought to have lost work in Fiji and there are growing concerns about the wellbeing of workers who have been laid off. Tony Whitton — managing director of the Rosie Travel Group, which operates two resorts — said he had to stand down 600 workers without pay because the business has no income coming in. "It's been the most heartbreaking aspect of our business — our business has been in operation since 1974, this is the first time that we've had to initiate a furlough," he said. In the midst of the coronavirus lockdown, Fiji was also hit by Cyclone Harold, and the economic impact will likely see a recession, or possibly even a depression. Mr Whitton said the sooner tourists can safely start returning, the better. "The greatest aid that Australia and New Zealand can give us at this time is the tourism dollar," he said.
Coronavirus will alter our history — just like these epidemics and pandemics before it
It's still too early to know how profoundly coronavirus will change our societies, but it's clear we'll be living with the shockwaves for years to come. This pandemic will alter the course of history in ways we can't predict — just like those before it. Along with wars, economic changes and technological developments, outbreaks of infectious disease have radically shaped the world we live in today. Perhaps the most infamous is the bubonic plague, which ravaged Europe for centuries and resulted in the Black Death, the global pandemic that struck Europe and Asia in the mid-1300s. We've also heard a lot recently about the Spanish flu pandemic of 1918, which killed millions of people around the world. But lesser-known epidemics and pandemics have also left an indelible mark. Here are four. The Great Plague of AthensThe first documented epidemic in history unfolded right back in the time of the Ancient Greeks. In 430 BC, a deadly disease swept through ancient Athens, a great city at its peak — and at war with the Spartans. In the three years that followed, about a third of the population — as many as 100,000 people — were killed, including the Athenian leader Pericles. The outbreak led to a breakdown of society, and arguably played a role in the eventual defeat of Athens. We still don't know what the devastating disease was: over the years typhus, typhoid, malaria, smallpox, bubonic plague and Ebola have all been offered as the culprit. "I think the best argument has been made for smallpox," Jo Hays, professor emeritus of history, tells ABC RN's Rear Vision. Athens never returned to its former glory and power. Smallpox and the settlement of the AmericasSmallpox changed the future of the Americas after the arrival of Christopher Columbus at the end of the 15th century. "Columbus landed on the island Hispaniola, and there was a native population of Arawaks," historian Frank Snowdon says. "Columbus imagined that he was going to subjugate the Arawak and reduce them to slavery, but this proved impossible because they died. "Within a generation the population had been reduced to 10,000 out of several million, and this was exclusively due to the effect of smallpox."In the years that followed Columbus's voyage, many species of plants and animals crossed the Atlantic Ocean for the first time, in what is sometimes known as the "Columbian exchange". Diseases — many apparently new to the "virgin soil of the Americas", like smallpox, measles and plague — were part of that exchange, says Professor Hays. He says these diseases collectively resulted in the deaths of around 90 per cent of people in the Americas, although there's argument around just what the populations were. "Some people have said [the population] might have been as much as 100 million, others say, no, it's probably only more like 10," he says. "But what is certainly true is that by the end of the century, by 1600, if the population of the Americas was 100 million, it was now 10 million. And if the population was 10 million, it was now 1 million."Unable to enslave the Arawak, Europeans instead turned to Africa. Professor Snowdon says this fuelled the growth of the African slave trade. "Because Africans possessed many of the same disease history that Europeans had, they possessed herd immunity and they were suitable for being enslaved," he says. "So this New World slavery is also a legacy of this lack of immunity or possessing immunity. It was a decisive factor in the whole history of the settlement of the Americas and also Australia and New Zealand."Yellow fever, a slave rebellion and the rise of the USIt wasn't just Columbus whose colonial plans were stopped by infectious disease. Napoleon Bonaparte lost control of the Caribbean colony of Saint-Domingue, now Haiti, because of an epidemic. In 1789, the year the French Revolution began, the French colony was the richest in the world, its wealth created by the labour of half a million black slaves producing sugar, indigo, cotton, cocoa, coffee, and tobacco. In August 1791, the slaves began a revolt to overthrow the French. Professor Snowdon says it was "the biggest slave rebellion in human history". "Something like 50,000 soldiers and sailors were sent to Saint-Domingue to crush the rebellion," he says. But unlike the slaves, the soldiers had no herd immunity to yellow fever, which was rife in the region. By the summer, 80 per cent of the soldiers had died, and the other 20 per cent were too sick to fight. "Napoleon accepted this defeat, withdrew the attempt to restore slavery, and so we have the beginning of decolonisation," Professor Snowdon says. "In addition, Napoleon realised that he didn't have a base for his ambitions in North America, and so he sold, to Thomas Jefferson, Louisiana. "This was the Louisiana Purchase of 1803 that doubled the size of the United States. "So we see yellow fever playing a huge geopolitical role in reorienting the balance of power among the great powers of the period, and we see the emergence of the United States as a very significant regional power to eventually becoming a global power."Cholera and class conflictCholera first appeared in the 19th century, during the Industrial Revolution. It was a time of mass urbanisation, Professor Snowdon says, and with that came overcrowded housing, terrible hygiene practices, and the threat of food and water being contaminated. "Cholera gave rise to enormous social tensions because it was clearly a class disease. People in the slums of Naples or Paris or London could see that with their own eyes," he says. "The people who were middle-class in their midst seemed to have this strange immunity: doctors, priests, the officials of local government. "That's because doctors and priests and officials didn't actually move into the tenements, they didn't take their meals there, they didn't drink the water there."But the poor thought there was a more sinister reason for it: that the disease was a deliberate attempt to rid cities of poverty. "So one sees riots in times of cholera and enormous tensions," Professor Snowdon says. The tension was reciprocated by the wealthier classes. They already feared the working class politically, and now feared them as bringers of disease. "I believe that this is a feature — not the cause, but a feature — in the violence of the repression of social uprisings in the 19th century," Professor Snowdon says. He says in Paris — "the most rebellious city in Europe at the time" — the 1848 revolution was met with extraordinary aggression. "And this was true as well after the Paris Commune [in 1871], which was extraordinarily repressive and violent and bloody," he says. Professor Snowdon says cholera "greatly sharpened" the fears and resentments on both sides of the barricades. "So yes, cholera was a disease of the Industrial Revolution that thrived on social tension and helped also to create it."What will the future hold?The 1918 Spanish flu outbreak was not only the worst pandemic of the 20th century, but also the deadliest in history, killing some 50 million people worldwide. There was a moment in the 1960s and 70s when, with the advent of antibiotics and vaccines, we thought infectious disease was a thing of the past. But we now know that isn't the case. Professor Hays says the modern world is also far more complicated than it ever has been; our populations are more urban and more mobile, so disease can spread faster. We're also living longer, and are more vulnerable as we age. "I think also we continue to rely on what are ultimately political choices where if we are going to combat a disease, we have to decide what is worth spending money on, how and when we are going to spend it," Professor Hays says. How history will record coronavirus is yet to be determined, but experts agree there will be lasting consequences. "It does look as though our world will never be the same. Quite likely the disease will be lasting and endemic and we will have to live with it for a long time," Professor Snowdon says. "I'm not talking about the apocalypse, I'm talking about living together with a dangerous pathogen … that we don't seem to have a clear way of eradicating."He predicts that the way we live and work will change: handshakes will become a thing of the past, we'll rely less on public transport, our economies will be transformed, the entertainment world will take on a new form. "I suspect also that people will learn the lesson at last that our healthcare systems … have to be built in such a way that healthcare is available to everyone, because that's part of the story of the spread of coronavirus, is so many people not having access to healthcare," he says. "I think we are going to be fundamentally transformed as a result of this."
The coronavirus pandemic will change the way we work, with women to reap many of the benefits
For Cynthia Calderon, working from home won't end when the COVID-19 pandemic does. She set up a home office a year ago to spend more time with her son on Fridays when he wasn't at school. Far from getting in the way of her career goals, she was given a promotion. "It was reassurance that if you work and you deliver, then it doesn't matter if you are in the office or at home, you get what you deserve," she said. Ms Calderon works in corporate affairs at engineering and construction company Clough and said more of the firm's staff would take up flexible work after trying it out during the pandemic. Her husband Ricardo Herrera, an engineer at Rio Tinto, has been working from home for the first time and believed the flexibility would stick in his workplace too. Childcare a shared responsibilityThe couple said this would help them share the load at home, which was something they were already working on. When their baby arrives in July, Ms Calderon said she would take the first six months of parental leave before heading back to work and handing over care duties to her husband for at least three months. "Cynthia is a high achiever and I did not want to stop her from work," Mr Herrera said. "I'm a bit scared to be honest, but I think this is a once in a lifetime opportunity to create a bond [with the newborn]."Rigid workplace structures have traditionally been a major barrier for women who, like Ms Calderon, don't want to give up their career due to caring responsibilities. But that has started to change in recent years and some believe an accelerated shift to workplace flexibility could be a silver lining to come out of a pandemic that has disproportionately affected female workers. The 2019 KPMG report She's Price(d)less identified key drivers behind Australia's gender pay gap and opportunities to effect change. Some of these have advanced during the pandemic, including improving work-life balance, increasing the availability of flexible work and increasing the availability of childcare or decreasing its cost. Benefits of working from homeWestern Australia has the nation's biggest gender pay gap at 22 per cent, and Tania Cecconi from CEOs for Gender Equity wanted employers to seize some of the opportunities. "One of the biggest benefits [of the pandemic] has been this huge shift to working from home, which has demanded flexibility for the first time in many organisations that have never delivered it," she said. "Roles that demand a lot of travel or are very inflexible typically lock out women with caring responsibilities. This time has demonstrated that in fact we don't need to have as much travel. "We cannot waste a crisis and I think one of the best learnings is that there are gains to be made and progressive organisations are already looking at the gains."Overall, the coronavirus pandemic has disproportionately hit female workers, with some dubbing it a "she-cession" amid fears it would reverse gains made toward workplace equality. Labour force economist Conrad Liveris said ABS data showed 58 per cent of jobs lost in WA since February belonged to women. He said this was primarily because women were more likely to be employed in part-time roles and female-dominated industries had been the hardest hit. While the most recent payroll data had shown a much steeper decline in men's wages, Mr Liveris said this was likely due to the Federal Government's JobKeeper payments kicking in. Gender pay gap forecast to widenIn WA's mining industry, for example, wages were down 30.8 per cent between March 14 and May 2. "We are likely to see an increased gender pay gap in Western Australia and across the country," Mr Liveris said. "With JobKeeper and decreased male wages we might see it even out a little bit. But over a two-year period, we will see an increase."But he said it wasn't all bad news. "I don't think we can say it is overall a completely negative picture for gender equality, there are some opportunities there," he said. "When we start looking at flexible working and maintaining the childcare sector, those are real opportunities to support women back into the workforce longer term. "Flexible work and working from home were already increasing but now we have an evidence base that all of the things we thought could work, actually can. "I think we will see more men spending more time on care and at home and women working a fair bit more."Childcare 'key to equality'University of Melbourne sociology Professor Lyn Craig said improving workplace flexibility would mainly benefit white-collar workers. "[Working from home] is a thing that happens at the higher echelons and women are disproportionately not [seen] at the higher echelons," she said. "Women are in high contact jobs that are not able to be done apart from in person."She said other opportunities to improve equality had been highlighted during the pandemic, but they would require government investment. She said childcare should stay free, wages should be increased in female-dominated industries such as healthcare, childcare and education that had proven vital, and economic stimulus should be spent in those sectors. "We often think of stimulus as infrastructure — roads and bridges — and that this is what makes the economy work and is nation-building," she said. "But in an economy that is heavily service-oriented, essential infrastructure includes things like childcare, because it makes it possible for those jobs to happen. "With great times of crisis comes great opportunity so it is possible that this will turn out to be a turning point, but it will depend on the opportunities being seized."Professor Craig said the free childcare initiative introduced during the pandemic, which was likely to end soon, was the most obvious way to improve equality. "It is uneconomic for most women to put their children into childcare for more than three days a week, so most of them don't," she said. Public sector reform mootedIn March, the WA Government launched a 10-year plan to address gender inequality, which included a target of 50 per cent women in top-level public service positions. Women's Interests Minister Simone McGurk said the state had struggled with a gender equity problem for many years. "We have had the highest gender pay gap in the country for a number of decades now and we need to do better," she said. "It is something we are committed to [improving] and we are calling on industry to be aware of these challenges as they rebuild post-COVID-19. "There are a lot of opportunities [out of the pandemic]. For instance, the ability for people to work from home, to work different hours, to have more flexible practices. "Some of our private sector are leading the way in that. In the public sector we need to get better at that."
'Justice hasn't changed, just the mode of delivery': How Victorian courts are adapting to coronavirus
Fuzzy pictures, distorted sounds, internet signals that freeze or drop out — we're all experiencing problems with videoconferencing in our lives. Key points:Victorian courts have had to change how they run because of the coronavirus pandemicThe courts are using more videoconferencing for remote hearingsDespite delays in some cases, senior judges say the arrangements are ensuring justice is done in VictoriaBut for Victoria's Chief Magistrate, Lisa Hannan, the COVID-19 pandemic has added complications — how to juggle 145 magistrates over 51 jurisdictions across the state, as well as the needs of thousands of lawyers and defendants. "There are occasional technical glitches," Chief Magistrate Hannan said. "But this is a learning exercise amongst other things."At the Melbourne Magistrates' Court, the number of videolink hearings has doubled to a recent peak of 244 a day, as a result of the pandemic. "We have transformed what has been largely a paper-based court to a court that is now hearing Webex hearings," Chief Magistrate Hannan said, referring to the online meeting software. Chief Magistrate Lisa Hannan told the ABC every change to the system had been carefully considered. Before the pandemic took hold, 2,000 people went in and out of the Magistrates' Court in Melbourne every day. Now, traffic is about a tenth of that. On any given day, only half of the rostered magistrates are working at the courts, with the rest working from home. Only the most urgent cases are being heard — such as bail applications and plea hearings, as well as cases involving those in custody, or people making family violence applications. Some lawyers and some prisoners or remandees are still attending court, but only if physical distancing can be achieved. Courts face tech constraints and deliver email judgmentsThe Criminal Bar Association of Victoria's vice-chair, Sally Flynn QC, said there had been problems with the number of links available and time restrictions that applied to videoconferencing. "Certainly it's difficult when you don't have ready access to your client, for example if we're dealing over videolink, or an instructing solicitor," Ms Flynn said. Victorian Legal Aid's director of criminal law, Dan Nicholson, said that was especially so for the most vulnerable clients in the system. "[For] our clients who have disabilities or require interpreters, it can be harder for them to participate in their hearings when they are done remotely," he said. While lawyers agree the system under COVID-19 as it stands is not perfect, some say the courts needed to change before the pandemic struck. Mr Nicholson said there were opportunities for a better system overall if the courts could improve the technology and the processes used. "Unfortunately the experience of a lot of people at court on the day is paper-based chaos really," he said. Across the varying court jurisdictions there's been a rapid and radical shift since the pandemic began, as large sections of the work of the courts has moved online. The biggest change is that jury trials have been suspended because of the risks of having groups of people together for extended periods of time. Emergency legislation allows judge-only trials but defendants have to consent to a judge-only hearing. As yet, the ABC understands that no applications have been received in any Victorian court. The Court of Appeal has continued to operate as usual, while commercial and civil matters in the Supreme Court are also proceeding. There are few, if any, people in court. The Supreme Court is upgrading its technological capabilities to host more web-based hearings, allocating staff to help set up virtual hearings. Some rulings are even being made via email. Finding a way to keep the courts running"Shutting the doors was not an option," the Supreme Court's Chief Justice Anne Ferguson told lawyers in a recent webinar hosted by the Victorian Bar Association. "[The change] has shown us we didn't need to be afraid," she said. "There's a real upside, an opportunity to drop the barriers to look at different ways to do things because we've had to."Traditionally, the industry has been heavily dependent on in-person meetings — whether it's an initial briefing with a client, or court hearings. For those who are in custody, court restrictions are being exacerbated by a prison ban on visitors, which means lawyers have to rely on telephone and video links too. Ms Flynn, from the Criminal Bar Association, said it was important lawyers could communicate with their clients. "It's imperative that we have access to clients to be able to get instructions to effectively act for clients in court and properly represent them," she said. Matters are also being adjourned until much later in the year, in the hope hearings can return to some kind of normalcy at some point. Delays prompt a rise in bail applicationsFor Ms Flynn, the delays are concerning. "Justice delayed is always justice denied and it is important that we try to minimise those delays as much as possible," she said. Chief Magistrate Hannan admits there will be a backlog. "Justice may be delayed in some cases but we will work very hard to ensure those cases are heard as soon as possible," she said. The delays have prompted a spike in the number of bail applications, as lawyers argue the restrictions within prisons on visitors and inmate programs because of the coronavirus pandemic are denying their clients timely justice. Earlier this month, inmate Mark Rowson's lawyers argued he should be released because he was at risk of dying if a coronavirus outbreak occurred in the prison. The system under COVID-19 restrictions also disadvantages those who want to represent themselves, because they are not linked in to the court's communications system and they are currently unable to access public libraries and public legal resources. There are also concerns about what happens to clients who can't meet bail or Community Corrections Order conditions, because of disruptions to alcohol, drug and other court-mandated services. Is the new system fair enough?Some lawyers are worried the many changes made to court practices during the pandemic could lead to an uptick in challenges and appeals. But Chief Magistrate Hannan rejects the idea that changes have been made too quickly. "I don't accept that anything's been done on the fly," she said. "We have considered each and every change that we have made. "The practice directions have been considered in terms of their impacts upon all stakeholders. "Justice hasn't changed, just the mode of delivery."County Court Chief Judge Peter Kidd told ABC radio last week that the courts were working in a compromised environment, but said the system was delivering justice. "It's not a perfect environment, it's not business as usual," he said"But is it more than satisfactory so that justice is done? The answer is yes."
Coronavirus shutdowns have exposed Australia's manufacturing gaps, Industry Minister Karen Andrews says
The coronavirus pandemic has exposed gaps in Australia's manufacturing capability however "complete self-sufficiency" should not be Australia's goal, according to the Federal Industry Minister. Key points:Global supply chains have been disrupted by coronavirus shutdowns in other countriesLocal manufacturers have ramped up production of key health and food supplies during the pandemicKaren Andrews says there is a groundswell of support for Australian-made productsIn a speech to the National Press Club today, Karen Andrews is expected to say there was a "a lot of scepticism" that local manufacturers could quickly ramp up demand for personal protective equipment like face masks, ventilators and hand sanitiser in response to COVID-19. "When we first began preparing for this crisis I was told that Australia would not be able to make more than about 37 million surgical masks a year – we're now expecting to produce more than 200 million this year," she is expected to say. "I refused to accept the advice that Australian manufacturers would only be able to fill small gaps in supply. "Capability exists in this country. What was needed was a change in the culture of how we think about our capability, about how we challenge the status quo."The pandemic has brought Australia's reliance on other countries into sharp focus, with Ms Andrews saying disruptions to global supply chains were a wake up call for many businesses. However, she argued the future of local manufacturing was not about "re-living a golden era". "While COVID-19 has brought issues such as sovereign capability to the forefront and, frankly, exposed gaps in our manufacturing, I am not suggesting that complete self-sufficiency should be our goal," she said. "There are many things Australia won't and shouldn't be making, but it is clear we cannot just rely on foreign supply chains for the essential items we need in a crisis. "We can't supply all our wants locally, but we have to be able to supply, or at least pivot our production processes to produce the goods we need. "And we need to compete on value, not on cost."The Minister said manufacturing had faced its own "existential challenges" over many decades and that while the decline of Australia's car industry attracted a lot of attention, other sectors such as food and beverage production were growing even before the pandemic. In her speech, Ms Andrews is expected to argue that cutting red tape across all levels of government was the most significant change that could be made without drawing on taxpayer funding, saying the crisis had shown changes that would normally take years could be made within weeks if necessary. "[Industry group] Manufacturing Australia cite the fact that a factory can be proposed, approved, built and operational in America in less time than it takes to jump the very first approval hurdle in Australia," she will tell the Press Club. "That's simply not good enough."She also is expected to say there is a "groundswell" of support from Australian consumers who will continue to demand more locally-produced products as the nation emerged from the crisis. "There's a real sense that in a post-COVID world, where norms have indeed been disrupted, there will be an adjustment of our fast, disposable, retail approach," she said. "A return to quality over quantity."
Coronavirus study to track the experiences of expectant mums during global pandemic
Brisbane woman Amy Buchanan had little idea what to expect from her first pregnancy — let alone one in the midst of a global health emergency. Key points:Expectant mum Amy Buchanan was told she might have to give birth to her first child on her ownThe global study will survey 10,000 women and partners about the care they received before and after their birth amid COVID-19Many women have reported feeling anxious, isolated and alone while pregnant during the pandemicThe 31-year-old's first child is due in a fortnight and the wait for its arrival has been anxious. Prior to coronavirus restrictions being lifted, Ms Buchanan was faced with the prospect of having to give birth to her first child alone — without her husband, family, trusted medical team or support network. "It would have been terrifying," she said. "We don't know what to expect, so it isn't just navigating pregnancy for the first time but navigating it during a health crisis. "We were unable to do birthing classes at the hospital, or to do group education sessions or hospital visits — all of that stuff was cancelled. "So not only are you potentially birthing by yourself but you also don't get the education in the lead-up to it."Complicating matters further, Ms Buchanan and her husband are also both frontline workers at the Caboolture Hospital, where coronavirus positive patients have been admitted. "It's such a new virus, we don't know whether I could contract it and pass it on to the baby via vertical transmission or what that would mean," she said. Global study to track pandemic pregnanciesAn Australian research centre is leading a new global study into how maternity services, pregnant women and new mothers have been impacted by the outbreak of coronavirus. The Stillbirth Centre of Research Excellence said the project hoped to survey 10,000 new mums and pregnant women, and their partners. Principal investigator Vicki Flenady said researchers would focus on the use of telehealth appointments, the psychological impacts of social isolation, and the support offered to families. "There's a concern with the move to telehealth for routine antenatal care [before and after birth] that we might be missing important opportunities to keep mothers and babies safe," Professor Flenady said. "We want to hear about these experiences from women to ensure we are giving them the best care. "Most hospitals have stopped running large antenatal clinics and [are] only seeing those women at more increased risk, so there's a concern that some women may be falling through the cracks. "We got some real anecdotal evidence from women saying how anxious they are about the change in the care, the feeling of isolation and being alone during this time."Professor Flenady said the results of the survey would be used to improve current and future maternity services for pregnant couples in a health crisis. Several countries were already onboard with the project including the United Kingdom, Ireland, Spain, Italy, Germany, France, Canada, India and Laos. 'Stronger mothers for this'Mary Thomas and her husband Bo welcomed their daughter Polly on May 9 and the new parents said while there were moments of nervousness leading up to the birth there were positives to being in lockdown. "I actually like that it's lockdown — I loved having just Bo and I during labour and not having visitors, so it was optimal bonding time for babe and I," she said. "I still feel really supported but also not overwhelmed as I couldn't imagine having visitors over every single day."In the weeks before giving birth, Ms Thomas said she had an epiphany about having a baby during a global pandemic. "As a mama-to-be, struggling to find that sense of calm as [I was] about to give birth during these uncertain and fearful times — I had an epiphany that changed my perspective around this entire situation," she said. "As I was packing my hospital bag, I started to cry, about to reach for my phone and call my husband for reassurance [but] something stopped me. "It was the figures of strong women in my family who birthed before me."She said it was time "to remember the lineage of strong women before you and where you came from". "Harness that collective power within and bring that with you when you birth your beautiful baby into this world," she said. "What will our babies' generation bring? The babies that were born during a pandemic? They're a force to be reckoned with. "They're the game changers, the leaders, the creators, the peacemakers — we will all be stronger women, stronger mothers for this."Virus impacts services, behaviours of pregnant womenProfessor Flenady said the question of how best to care for women and families during a pandemic was one being considered by health professionals around the world. "We'll be able to compare the experiences that women are having during this time against the different policies that are in place across countries," she said. "We hope to learn a lot from that in terms of what's acceptable and what sort of step we need to put in place to support women at this time."Professor Flenady said while current evidence indicated pregnant women were not more severely affected by COVID-19 than the general population, the pandemic was affecting the delivery of antenatal services and the behaviours of pregnant women. "There's no evidence to indicate that pregnant women are more susceptible to COVID-19 or that their babies are at any particular increased risk," she said. "However, the worrying consequence of the outbreak is that women are maybe reluctant to seek medical attention when they need it. "Such as when they experience warning signs of decreased foetal movement and this may put them at increased risk of stillbirth. "We know that stillbirth is not a rare occurrence, six families a day endure that heartache of a stillborn baby, so we want to understand women's concerns more."
NSW schools coronavirus shutdown is ending next week — here's what you need to know
NSW schools will see students back in the classrooms next week, but its not going to be business as usual for children and teachers amid remaining coronavirus restrictions. Key points:State students will return to full-time campus learning next MondayMs Berejiklian said it will become "common" to see schools close from infectionsHowever, kids are at low risk of being infected with coronavirus, experts saidNSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian previously said she wanted kids back in the classroom from Term 3, beginning July 21, but has since brought forward the date by about nine weeks. "The health advice is very clear: a return to full-time face-to-face teaching is safe," Ms Berejiklian said. Under the new guidelines, students will be able to use the school library, continue with apprenticeships, attend after-school care and mingle in the schoolyard. However, school excursions including camps, as well as work experience, debating and sport with other school communities will not be permitted. Are all Australian students going back to school?No — in NSW, all public school students have been ordered to return to the classroom next Monday, but Catholic and private schools are under no obligation to follow suit. NSW Catholic Schools said it aimed to have all 250,000 students back by the end of May, though no exact date has been provided yet. In Queensland, about 80 per cent of state school students returned to campuses full-time this week, and the remainder are set to join next Monday. In Victoria, all state school students will be in classrooms again by June 9, with students in preprimary, Year 1, Year 2, and Years 11 and 12 to return next Monday, too. Are children at risk?It's "extremely rare" to see COVID-19 cases among children both in Australia and overseas, consultant paediatrician Kirsten Perrett told the ABC. "Most of the time [with] respiratory viruses such as influenza, children are actually more susceptible to infection and severe disease, but this is not the case that we're seeing with COVID-19," Dr Perrett said. This may be because kids' immune systems are better at dealing with infections that they've never seen before, Dr Perrett explained. "If this was influenza," infectious disease physician and microbiologist Peter Collignon added, "we would keep schools closed until this was over". How will schools keep students safe?School students will not be required to socially distance from their peers, but have been told to maintain a 1.5-metre distance from their teachers and other school staff. Good hygiene practices will be encouraged, like washing hands regularly, avoiding sharing food or drinks and coughing or sneezing into the elbow. The Department of Education said it had provided schools with unlimited supplies of soap, sanitiser, disinfectant wipes and personal protective equipment (like masks). High-contact areas on campus, like door handles, lockers, light switches and handrails, will continue to receive additional cleaning, the department said. Students will receive priority over other passengers on public transport and will not be turned away from boarding a service, the department added. What if a student tests positive?If a case of coronavirus is found within the school community, lockdown protocol — including calling in health authorities, closing the school and contact tracing — will continue to take place. Since the pandemic began in March, numerous Sydney schools have shut temporarily after a confirmed case, including Epping Boys High School, Normanhurst West Public School, Warragamba Public School and St Mary's Senior High School. Ms Berejiklian said moving forward it would be "common ... for schools to be shut down temporarily". What if I choose not to send my child to school?Campuses have been open in NSW only for the children of essential workers for the past eight weeks, in a bid to slow the spread of coronavirus. However, from Monday, authorities have warned parents students will be marked absent if they are in good health but remain at home. "The message is schools return next week and students need to be back in the classroom," Minister for Education Sarah Mitchell said. "Rolls will be marked as per normal and unexplained absences will be followed up. "You should be at school — as long as you are well."
Cinemas, camping, gyms and footy training: The latest coronavirus rules around your favourite recreational activities
Parts of Australia are slowly beginning to wake up after a coronavirus-induced hibernation, with businesses and activities gradually returning to normal. But that doesn't mean flipping a switch and things going back to the way they were before. The Prime Minister recently announced a three-step framework, detailing how certain industries can start reopening to the public. But it's up to each state and territory to decide how and when they roll back their restrictions, and which businesses will be allowed to do what. It's also up to each state and territory government whether restrictions return if COVID-19 cases start to rise again. Here's what we know so far about some common activities. When will gyms reopen?Step one of the national three-step frame work doesn't permit any indoor physical activity, including at gyms. But it does allow up to 10 people to participate in outdoor sport, and some gyms and boot camps have taken advantage of that by offering limited outdoor classes if their location allows. Some states are keener than others to start working off all that extra Uber Eats. Gyms are open in the Northern Territory, but you shouldn't be there for more than two hours (props to you if you're working out longer than that). In Western Australia, up to 20 people can now participate in indoor and outdoor fitness classes as long as there's no shared equipment. Indoor gyms are still closed in New South Wales and Victoria — NSW says outdoor exercise equipment can be used "with caution", while Victoria says don't touch it. Up to 10 people are allowed to join outdoor gyms or bootcamps in Tasmania, the ACT and Queensland. South Australia has a 10-person limit for outdoor non-contact sports at the moment, and gyms are flagged to reopen on June 8. Step three of the national framework says venues can welcome up to 100 people at a time, so lots of owners are in the process of working out how they're going to implement those limits. One condition of gyms reopening to up to 20 people at a time is that they must adhere to the four square metre rule (so some smaller gyms may have to limit their attendees to even less than 20). Every gym has their own COVID-19 plan, so contact your facility to see how they're implementing it and the conditions of their reopening before you go. What about cinemas?No cinemas yet — but in some places, they're not far off. The national framework says indoor movie theatres can open for up to 20 people in step two and up to 100 people in step three. Queensland is adopting this part of the plan for stage two of their roadmap, which is expected to begin on June 12, as has South Australia, where cinemas and theatres are to reopen on June 8. Cinemas are set to reopen in the Northern Territory on June 5, and Western Australia has also flagged reopening cinemas with gathering limits as part of their third phase of easing restrictions, which we should hear more about in the next few weeks. There's not a lot of detail available at the moment about what distances people would have to sit apart when cinemas do reopen. Cinemas and theatres in New South Wales are still closed for now, as they are in the ACT, Tasmania and Victoria (but Tasmania has flagged reopening cinemas to up to 20 people from June 15). Can I go to brunch?In most states and territories, you can — but the process might be a little different to what we're used to. Up to 20 patrons can sit in cafes and restaurants in Western Australia, but Queensland, Tasmania, the ACT and New South Wales venues are limited to 10 customers at a time for now. Outdoor dining in small groups has resumed in South Australia, as long as everyone is appropriately distanced. Table service is still not allowed in Victoria, but you can get takeaway. Restaurants, cafes, food courts and sports or RSL clubs are open again in the Northern Territory, but as with gyms, they have a two-hour time limit. Some restaurants and cafes require people to have downloaded the COVIDSafe app or to provide their contact details before they can dine at the venue for contact tracing purposes, and because of customer limits, pre-bookings are recommended. Or perhaps a nightclub?Sorry party animals — nightclubs aren't at the top of the list to reopen first in most places. The NT is ready to party though, they're reopening nightclubs, concert halls, dance halls and bars on June 5. Queensland has listed nightclubs as one of the venues that can have up to 100 people from July 10, but that's subject to further planning. Nightclubs have also been listed as a "future step for consideration" in South Australia, but there's no date on that for now. The national framework recommends nightclubs don't open until the third stage of the three-step plan — but when they do, they can have up to 100 people. It also recommends that places like brothels and strip clubs stay closed until further notice. I miss camping! Can I go?Not in Victoria, there's still a ban on camping in national parks there. Camping in a state park or campground is still prohibited in Tasmania too, but is flagged in their second stage of easing restrictions that starts on June 15, and campgrounds in the ACT are also closed. Campgrounds and caravan parks remain closed in NSW, unless you work or permanently live there. Queenslanders are only allowed to go on day trips at the moment, but from June 12 camping in national and state parks will be back on, and people can travel up to 250km from home to do it. But in South Australia, regional travel is allowed again and campgrounds and caravan parks are allowed to reopen, again with all the necessary social distancing. Camping is also permitted in Western Australia in accordance with travel restrictions — there are still some intrastate borders in place in WA, and campers must observe the 10-person gathering limit. Similarly in the Northern Territory, you can camp but you can't enter restricted biosecurity zones, so it's best to check what parks are open and the activities you can do there before you go. Can my footy team train and play?Organised training is allowed for sports teams in the Northern Territory, and playing team sports is expected to be allowed from June 5. In Western Australia you can play non-contact sport with up to 20 people (some contact sport is expected return in their next phase). Right now in Queensland up to 10 people can play non-contact sport outdoors, but from June 12, up to 20 people can gather for "non-contact indoor and outdoor community sport". Outdoor sports training is allowed in South Australia for up to 10 people, and competitive sport is flagged to resume from June 8, including indoor sport. The ACT is allowing up to 10 people to participate in social sport, as long as it's non-contact and outdoors, and up to 10 people can do non-contact training in Tasmania too. In Victoria, sport can resume if it's outside, non-competitive, everyone stays at least 1.5 metres apart and there's no more than ten people in a group — so if you can't modify your sport so there's no contact, it's not allowed. New South Wales also says people must stay 1.5 metres apart outdoors, and no more than 10 people can gather. I want all my loved ones at my wedding. Is that allowed?Depends how long your list of loved ones is. Restrictions limiting attendance at weddings and funerals have been particularly tough, but these are slowly starting to relax in most states and territories. The Northern Territory doesn't specify a limit on outdoor weddings, and in Queensland the current 10-person limit is set to increase to 20 from June 12 and up to 100 from July 10. Western Australian weddings can have up to 20 people inside or 30 people outside. Ten guests can also attend a wedding in New South Wales right now, not including the couple, celebrant and photographer. Victoria has a similar rule — 10 guests plus the couple and celebrant — same in Tasmania. The ACT also has a 10-person rule for weddings — there, it includes the couple, but doesn't include the celebrant and photographer. South Australia also includes the couple in their 10-person limit, but not a celebrant or "necessary staff". There's various social distancing and hygiene conditions to holding weddings no matter where you are, so check with your venue first. If you have guests who are interstate, don't forget some states and territories still have strict border restrictions in place. Guests may be forced to quarantine after crossing the border, or if they don't have the appropriate exemptions they may not be allowed to cross at all. When can my kids go back to dance class?Or basketball practice, or swimming lessons, or orchestra… It all depends where they do their extracurricular activities, and how many people are in the group. In Queensland, for example, from June 12, up to 20 people will be allowed at pools, community sports clubs, theatres, auditoriums, health clubs and yoga studios. The Northern Territory has already opened studios again for dance classes and organised training for sports teams is back on too. Outdoor sports training can go ahead in South Australia in small groups, and community halls and clubrooms can open, but they have to keep any indoor sporting facilities closed. But in New South Wales dance halls are still closed, as are all indoor recreation facilities and indoor public pools. The ACT allows small groups to play and train for social sport and for swimming lessons to take place, but all indoor and outdoor gatherings can have a maximum of 10 people including children. In Victoria, small group lessons at places like community centres "cannot resume at this time" and contact sport is off the table — but from Monday, new protocols will allow for some gathering-limited, socially distanced AFL and netball training to resume. Tasmania says any indoor venue used for sport and recreation can't open or operate, including those used for dance, cheer and gymnastics, but non-contact sports training is allowed in groups of 10. In Western Australia up to 20 people can partake in fitness and non-contact sports, swim in public pools or gather at community facilities. We've heard estimates about overseas travel not returning before 2021, and even that air travel might not fully go back to normal until 2023. But for now, all overseas travel is currently banned and exceptions to the rule are few and far between. There's a chance we could be able to visit New Zealand before international borders completely reopen, but there's no guarantees on that right now. That dream overseas holiday will have to wait a little while longer. The main thing to remember... Every state and territory is rolling back their restrictions differently. Within that, each business is coming up with their own plans to meet requirements based on their particular location, facilities, staff and style of operation. National Cabinet is reviewing the progress of easing restrictions regularly, as are state and territory governments, so there is a chance that restrictions could remain in place or even be brought back if safety is at risk. If you're not sure about something, check your state or territory government's website or contact the business directly to ask how they're doing things.
Young people warned about coronavirus amid relaxed restrictions in restaurants and bars
Health authorities in NSW have confirmed three new cases of coronavirus from almost 9,000 tests done yesterday, bringing the state's total infections to 3,086. Of the three new cases, all were overseas cases identified during the mandatory 14-day hotel quarantine, Dr Christine Selvey from NSW Health said. She said there was no risk of community transmission from those cases. Health Minister Brad Hazzard said it was crucial that high testing rates continued, particularly as eased coronavirus restrictions meant restaurants and bars would open their doors to more patrons. "It's absolutely essential as we move forward and we try to relax some of the restrictions we've lived under for the past few months," he said. He highlighted that one in five people who tested positive for coronavirus have been within the 20-29 age bracket. "I want to emphasise again the danger of young people who may be asymptomatic or might have mild symptoms," he said. "As we are freeing up our restrictions, particularly around clubs and hotels and so on … these young people who may think they are invincible, are actually not invincible. "With these freedoms come big responsibilities." Under the relaxed coronavirus restrictions from June 1, hospitality venues will be required to adhere to strict guidelines to operate: Mr Hazzard refused to comment on the specifics of the rules, reiterating that industry consultation was ongoing, but stressed that social distancing was essential to the success of eased restrictions. When asked about when beauty therapists can commence business again, Mr Hazzard said plans were in motion but did not provide a timeline. Mr Hazzard also announced a $34 million program to train physiotherapists to deal with the "horrific lung conditions" associated with the virus. 
Australian coronavirus death toll rises after Victorian man in his 60s dies in hospital
The Australian coronavirus death toll has risen to 102, after a Victorian man died in hospital overnight. "Our condolences are with the family and friends of this person at this time," Victoria's Deputy Chief Health Officer Annaliese van Diemen said at a press conference this afternoon. "The person was a man in his 60s who died in a Victorian hospital. "The family wish for their privacy to be protected at this point so no further details will be given at this point in time." The state's 19th death comes after a week in which Victoria has been home to the majority of Australia's new reported cases. New South Wales recorded its 50th coronavirus fatality yesterday, after an 80-year-old Sydney woman who was exposed to the virus at an outpatient hospital clinic died. Victoria has recorded 10 new coronavirus cases since yesterday, including four returned travellers in hotel quarantine and six cases under investigation. None of the new cases are currently linked to the Cedar Meats outbreak in Melbourne's west, which sits at 111 cases including 67 staff. Updated Sunday, May 24 But Dr van Diemen said it was possible investigation of the cases could reveal links to the Cedar Meats outbreak or another cluster at the Fawkner McDonald's restaurant. "As we've discussed, some of these results come in quite late at night, so it does [need] quite a bit of investigating to link that into the other outbreaks or known cases, so we're just seeing what those investigations show us," she said. When asked about Victoria's historically high number of cases believed to be community transmission, Dr van Diemen said it was because the state was "testing more". "We're doing significantly increased testing compared to other states at the moment, so the more we test, the more we will find and we want to find these individual cases because we want to be able to put that ring around them and make sure there is no transmission," she said. "The harder we look, the more we will find." Victoria's state school students in prep, year 1 and 2 as well as years 11 and 12 are due to return to classrooms from Tuesday. When asked if Victorians using public transport should be using face masks, Dr van Diemen reiterated Federal Government advice that the majority of people would not benefit from wearing a surgical mask. "Our advice on top of that for commuters is to be very vigilant, don't use public transport if you're sick, be aware of physical distancing and ensure really good cough and sneeze etiquette," she said. She said health authorities were working closely with the Department of Transport and unions to look at possible measures to support physical distancing. 
Donald Trump's cries about 'Obamagate' are a ploy to distract the media from the coronavirus
In the past week, a rebadged conspiracy theory has been breathlessly promoted by the US President and conservative media pundits: OBAMAGATE! It's not worth discussing at length. But in summary, the story is essentially an updated version of a long-running fringe theory that the Obama administration and the nefarious "deep state" illegally sabotaged Donald Trump from the very start, partly by entrapping his former national security adviser Michael Flynn in the Russia scandal. There is no evidence to tether the vague narrative to reality. Even Trump, when asked for more details, has struggled to specify what criminal activity took place: "It's been going on for a very long time," the President recently mused. "You know what the crime is. The crime is obvious to everybody." Let's be clear; this entire theory is a diversion, a predictable move from the Trump political playbook. While "Obamagate" is being covered and debunked by media outlets, less time is spent reporting on the 90,000-odd Americans killed by the coronavirus, the Administration's slow pandemic response or the human cost of the worst economic crisis America has seen since the Great Depression of the 1930s. Steve Bannon, the President's former strategist, is often credited with best distilling this strategy. "The Democrats don't matter," he reportedly said in 2018. "The real opposition is the media. And the best way to deal with them is to flood the zone with shit." In an ideal world, media outlets would simply filter out the metaphorical faecal matter, reporting what's right and ignoring what's wrong. But in reality, the US industry in the digital age is more partisan than ever and certain sections are often diametrically opposed. Key figures, like the President, can also simply turn to social media to spread their messages. For journalists, following the range of competing narratives for a living can be tiring. For casual observers, making sense of what's accurate, what's exaggerated and what's fake can be completely overwhelming, particularly in an era where increasingly cash-strapped companies value conflict, sensational headlines and clicks above reasoned, fact-based coverage. Some people tune out totally: a few surveys suggest as many as two-thirds of Americans feel worn-out by the torrent of information. Many others retreat to their ideological corners, limiting themselves to programs, presenters and pundits that largely reinforce their preconceived world view. Consensus, even during a once-in-a-century crisis, is much harder to come by. Of course, Trump and his team didn't create this environment — but they do thrive in it. When the daily media cycle is going against them, it's often easily upended with an inflammatory tweet or outrageous press conference. If that doesn't work or a crisis lingers, alternate realities are promoted. During the historic impeachment trial, hours of airtime were dedicated to discussing and debunking theories about Joe Biden's son, Hunter. In the midst of the Mueller investigation, the longest-serving (right-wing) foreign minister in Australian history, Alexander Downer, was talked about as a Clinton-loving deep-state superspy. Even when fact-checkers are able to keep up, their findings can simply serve to elevate the initial fabrication. Arguably even this piece is part of the problem — how many of you had heard of "Obamagate" before now? The whole purpose of "flooding the zone" is to distract and muddy the waters to obscure inconvenient facts. New York University professor Jay Rosen and Vox journalist Sean Illing have written about this phenomenon at length, arguing the media has failed to adapt to Trump's tactics. At this point, it's worth emphasising the coronavirus crisis is totally different from anything else the Trump Administration has faced so far. Unlike impeachment or the Russia probe, the pandemic has upended the everyday lives of Americans. It's much harder to distract voters from something that's landing their loved ones in hospital or making it impossible to put food on the table. Trump's bungled response is pretty clearly on the public record too. He repeatedly, publicly diminished the threat of the virus, comparing it to the flu and stating that it would soon disappear, and failed to act early enough to contain much of the damage.  Several Republican and many Democratic strategists now believe that if this year's election becomes a referendum on Trump's record, he will lose. So far, the White House and the President's campaign have responded by increasing the amount of detritus in "the zone". "Obamagate" is just one note in a crescendo of recent attempts to rile the nation, spread misinformation and reignite old feuds. The President repeatedly attacked governors and smeared whistle-blowers. Trump's son, Don Jr, has even made baseless insinuations about Joe Biden. More than anything, these developments seem a sign of the Commander-in-Chief's distress. A recent national poll has him 11 points behind Biden. The pandemic may be narrowing his path to a second term.  As voting day approaches, the metaphorical "flood" is only likely to grow as team Trump tries to bounce back and keep this presidency afloat. 
Health authorities will not see Liberal MPs' coronavirus survey results, Premier Steven Marshall says
Health authorities will not see the results of a Liberal Party survey of voters' views on easing coronavirus restrictions, SA Premier Steven Marshall says. The survey asked households to rank which restriction they would like to see eased next. Listed options included community sport, professional sport, international and interstate travel, festivals and concerts, weddings, funerals, places of worship, hospitality, gyms and cinemas.  Premier Steven Marshall said the individual Liberal MPs who authorised the survey would keep the results — and they would not be presented to the state's COVID-19 transition committee. "They haven't asked for it at this stage," Mr Marshall said.  "There is absolutely nothing wrong with getting information from your electorate, in fact, we encourage it. "I don't think it's something the Liberal Party is doing — there are Liberal members of parliament, there are Labor members of parliament … [getting] feedback. "It's done by all political parties." Labor MP Chris Picton said the COVID-19 restrictions survey was different to other political surveys — including those previously issued by his own party — because this one sought to use the coronavirus health crisis for "political ends". "This is not a legitimate exercise — it's a purely political exercise," Mr Picton said. "This is not going to the health ministry — it is not going to [SA Chief Public Health Officer] Nicola Spurrier and the health experts. "It's going to the Liberal Party as part of their political campaigning." Katina Michael from the University of Wollongong said data collection was critical to the way modern political parties operate — but it was difficult to track how data was used and stored.  "Political parties in Australia are exempt from the Privacy Act 1988, from the Spam Act 2003 and the Do Not Call Register Act 2006, so there's a lot of mystery surrounding what political parties do with the data they collect," she said. "Our laws need to catch up with what can and cannot be done in the name of elections, in the name of campaigning, in the name of service provision. "I think we have to start asking [these] questions." Professor Michael said survey recipients should exercise caution when responding to material received in the letterbox, over the phone or online.  "Not every survey we receive is a valid one — you have a choice [whether to participate]," she said. "[You should ask] what is the premise and the underlying motive behind that survey? "How is your data going to be used and what kind of feedback are you going to receive for the usage of your data? "Will it be stored for 'x' number of years, until the next election?" 
Spain prepares to open its borders after coronavirus lockdown as anti-government protesters fill the streets
Spain will reopen its borders to tourists in July and its top football division will kick off again in June, Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez has announced, marking another phase in the easing of one of the world's strictest lockdowns. Mr Sanchez's dual announcements coincided with calls for his resignation over the lockdown's impact on the economy from the far-right Vox party, whose calls for protests in cities across Spain drew thousands of horn-blaring cars and motorbikes. "From July, foreign tourism will resume in safe conditions. We will guarantee tourists will not take any risks and will not bring us any risks," Mr Sanchez told a televised news conference, without giving further details. Foreign visitors contribute around an eighth of Spain's economic output and the Government curbs — taken to contain one of Europe's severest coronavirus outbreaks — shuttered everything from hotels, bars and restaurants to beaches and leisure parks just as its tourism season got underway. Spain's overnight death toll from the coronavirus rose by 48 to a total of 28,678, the seventh straight day the fatality rate was less than 100, while the total number of cases rose to 235,290. Restrictions on movement are being gradually eased, with bars in some parts of the country already being allowed to open their terraces, and museums and churches reopening — though residents of Madrid and Barcelona, both national epicentres of the virus, will only follow suit on Monday. Mr Sanchez said there would be a 10-day period of national mourning for victims, starting on Tuesday. Several-thousand followers of the Vox party gathered in their cars and on motorbikes in the centre of Madrid and other Spanish cities to protest against the Government's handling of the coronavirus crisis. The party accuses the Government and Mr Sanchez of lying about the impact of the health crisis and of violating Spaniards' rights by confining people to their homes and closing businesses during the lockdown. Vox called for protesters to attend the rallies in their vehicles and thus skirt the ban on social gatherings. Vox called the protest the "Caravan for Spain and Liberty". "We will never forget what they have done," Vox leader Santiago Abascal said from the open-top bus leading the caravan as it inched down a Madrid boulevard. "Do not doubt that we will make them face justice. They know it and fear our freedom. That is why they try to intimidate us." Most cars and motorbikes were decked with Spanish flags. There were also small groups of people who participated on foot, with some not respecting the 2-metre social-distancing rules. Protests were also held in Barcelona, Sevilla and other provincial capitals. Spain's Government said the confinement measures were necessary to save the nation's hospitals from collapse and to save thousands of lives. ABC/wires 
Racist attack in Launceston and other coronavirus taunts prompt plea for calm
Three people claim to have been the target of a racially motivated attack early this week as they walked to the public toilets near a supermarket in Launceston. They said items were thrown at them, they were called "Corona", and a phone was hit from one of their hands as they tried to record what was happening.  Late Wednesday night, authorities confirmed no new cases of coronavirus had been diagnosed, with the state's total remaining at 226. Sarah Bolt, the state's anti-discrimination commissioner, said she had heard of other targeted racial incidents in relation to coronavirus.  "There has been a stark increase in the number of reports and inquiries in relation to discrimination on the basis of race, and the recipients of those tirades have been predominantly people from Asia or who are of Asian appearance," she said.  "And again, most of them have all related to COVID-19." This type of targeted racial abuse was condemned by police in Hobart in March, when a Hong Kong student was taunted and punched for wearing a medical face mask at a local supermarket. The student was with a friend in the New Town Plaza car park when a man shouted "you've got the virus" and "go back to your country". Ms Bolt said racially fuelled attacks created fear and anxiety for those on the receiving end. "I've spoken to members of the Chinese community who talked about people being frightened to go to the shops or to go about their daily business in fear of being attacked verbally, and even physically, and particularly being blamed for the coronavirus pandemic," she said. "So that sort of has limitations on how they can just enjoy their everyday life, and people tend to forget that many of the people who are of Asian appearance in Tasmania have been here for multi generations." While physical abuse is a matter for police investigation, verbal discrimination based on race can be referred to Equal Opportunity Tasmania for further action.  Elise Archer, the Minister for Justice and Corrections, said penalties could be enforced.  "That type of behaviour is deeply concerning to us as a Government, it's deeply concerning to me as the Attorney-General," she said.  "I have encouraged anyone that has experienced that sort of attack, that's racially motivated, to contact Equal Opportunity Tasmania, where the anti-discrimination commissioner can take on such a complaint." 
Coronavirus restrictions are slowly easing, so when will your gym, cinemas, cafes and campgrounds reopen?
Parts of Australia are slowly beginning to wake up after a coronavirus-induced hibernation, with businesses and activities gradually returning to normal. But that doesn't mean flipping a switch and things going back to the way they were before. The Prime Minister recently announced a three-step framework, detailing how certain industries can start reopening to the public.  But it's up to each state and territory to decide how and when they roll back their restrictions, and which businesses will be allowed to do what. It's also up to each state and territory government whether restrictions return if COVID-19 cases start to rise again. Here's what we know so far about some common activities. Step one of the national three-step frame work doesn't permit any indoor physical activity, including at gyms.  But it does allow up to 10 people to participate in outdoor sport, and some gyms and boot camps have taken advantage of that by offering limited outdoor classes if their location allows. Some states are keener than others to start working off all that extra Uber Eats. Gyms are open in the Northern Territory, but you shouldn't be there for more than two hours (props to you if you're working out longer than that). In Western Australia, up to 20 people can now participate in indoor and outdoor fitness classes as long as there's no shared equipment. Indoor gyms are still closed in New South Wales and Victoria  NSW says outdoor exercise equipment can be used "with caution", while Victoria says don't touch it. Up to 10 people are allowed to join outdoor gyms or bootcamps in Tasmania, the ACT and Queensland.  South Australia has a 10-person limit for outdoor non-contact sports at the moment, and gyms are flagged to reopen on June 8. Step three of the national framework says venues can welcome up to 100 people at a time, so lots of owners are in the process of working out how they're going to implement those limits. One condition of gyms reopening to up to 20 people at a time is that they must adhere to the four square metre rule (so some smaller gyms may have to limit their attendees to even less than 20). Every gym has their own COVID-19 plan, so contact your facility to see how they're implementing it and the conditions of their reopening before you go.  No cinemas yet  but in some places, they're not far off.  The national framework says indoor movie theatres can open for up to 20 people in step two and up to 100 people in step three. Queensland is adopting this part of the plan for stage two of their roadmap, which is expected to begin on June 12, as has South Australia, where cinemas and theatres are to reopen on June 8. Cinemas are set to reopen in the Northern Territory on June 5, and Western Australia has also flagged reopening cinemas with gathering limits as part of their third phase of easing restrictions, which we should hear more about in the next few weeks. There's not a lot of detail available at the moment about what distances people would have to sit apart when cinemas do reopen. Cinemas and theatres in New South Wales are still closed for now, as they are in the ACT, Tasmania and Victoria (but Tasmania has flagged reopening cinemas to up to 20 people from June 15). For now, stick to Netflix (and iView!).  In most states and territories, you can  but the process might be a little different to what we're used to. Up to 20 patrons can sit in cafes and restaurants in Western Australia, but Queensland, Tasmania, the ACT and New South Wales venues are limited to 10 customers at a time for now. Outdoor dining in small groups has resumed in South Australia, as long as everyone is appropriately distanced. Table service is still not allowed in Victoria, but you can get takeaway. Restaurants, cafes, food courts and sports or RSL clubs are open again in the Northern Territory, but as with gyms, they have a two-hour time limit. Some restaurants and cafes require people to have downloaded the COVIDSafe app or to provide their contact details before they can dine at the venue for contact tracing purposes, and because of customer limits, pre-bookings are recommended. Sorry party animals  nightclubs aren't at the top of the list to reopen first in most places. The NT is ready to party though, they're reopening nightclubs, concert halls, dance halls and bars on June 5. Queensland has listed nightclubs as one of the venues that can have up to 100 people from July 10, but that's subject to further planning. Nightclubs have also been listed as a "future step for consideration" in South Australia, but there's no date on that for now. The national framework recommends nightclubs don't open until the third stage of the three-step plan  but when they do, they can have up to 100 people. It also recommends that places like brothels and strip clubs stay closed until further notice. Not in Victoria, there's still a ban on camping in national parks there. Camping in a state park or campground is still prohibited in Tasmania too, but is flagged in their second stage of easing restrictions that starts on June 15, and campgrounds in the ACT are also closed. Campgrounds and caravan parks remain closed in NSW, unless you work or permanently live there.  Queenslanders are only allowed to go on day trips at the moment, but from June 12 camping in national and state parks will be back on, and people can travel up to 250km from home to do it. But in South Australia, regional travel is allowed again and campgrounds and caravan parks are allowed to reopen, again with all the necessary social distancing.  Camping is also permitted in Western Australia in accordance with travel restrictions  there are still some intrastate borders in place in WA, and campers must observe the 10-person gathering limit. Similarly in the Northern Territory, you can camp but you can't enter restricted biosecurity zones, so it's best to check what parks are open and the activities you can do there before you go. Organised training is allowed for sports teams in the Northern Territory, and playing team sports is expected to be allowed from June 5. In Western Australia you can play non-contact sport with up to 20 people (some contact sport is expected return in their next phase).  Right now in Queensland up to 10 people can play non-contact sport outdoors, but from June 12, up to 20 people can gather for "non-contact indoor and outdoor community sport".  Outdoor sports training is allowed in South Australia for up to 10 people, and competitive sport is flagged to resume from June 8, including indoor sport.  The ACT is allowing up to 10 people to participate in social sport, as long as it's non-contact and outdoors, and up to 10 people can do non-contact training in Tasmania too. In Victoria, sport can resume if it's outside, non-competitive, everyone stays at least 1.5 metres apart and there's no more than ten people in a group  so if you can't modify your sport so there's no contact, it's not allowed. New South Wales also says people must stay 1.5 metres apart outdoors, and no more than 10 people can gather.  Depends how long your list of loved ones is. Restrictions limiting attendance at weddings and funerals have been particularly tough, but these are slowly starting to relax in most states and territories.  The Northern Territory doesn't specify a limit on outdoor weddings, and in Queensland the current 10-person limit is set to increase to 20 from June 12 and up to 100 from July 10. Western Australian weddings can have up to 20 people inside or 30 people outside. Ten guests can also attend a wedding in New South Wales right now, not including the couple, celebrant and photographer. Victoria has a similar rule  10 guests plus the couple and celebrant  same in Tasmania. The ACT also has a 10-person rule for weddings  there, it includes the couple, but doesn't include the celebrant and photographer. South Australia also includes the couple in their 10-person limit, but not a celebrant or "necessary staff".  There's various social distancing and hygiene conditions to holding weddings no matter where you are, so check with your venue first. If you have guests who are interstate, don't forget some states and territories still have strict border restrictions in place. Guests may be forced to quarantine after crossing the border, or if they don't have the appropriate exemptions they may not be allowed to cross at all.  Or basketball practice, or swimming lessons, or orchestra It all depends where they do their extracurricular activities, and how many people are in the group. In Queensland, for example, from June 12, up to 20 people will be allowed at pools, community sports clubs, theatres, auditoriums, health clubs and yoga studios. The Northern Territory has already opened studios again for dance classes and organised training for sports teams is back on too. Outdoor sports training can go ahead in South Australia in small groups, and community halls and clubrooms can open, but they have to keep any indoor sporting facilities closed. But in New South Wales dance halls are still closed, as are all indoor recreation facilities and indoor public pools. The ACT allows small groups to play and train for social sport and for swimming lessons to take place, but all indoor and outdoor gatherings can have a maximum of 10 people including children. In Victoria, small group lessons at places like community centres "cannot resume at this time" and contact sport is off the table  but from Monday, new protocols will allow for some gathering-limited, socially distanced AFL and netball training to resume. Tasmania says any indoor venue used for sport and recreation can't open or operate, including those used for dance, cheer and gymnastics, but non-contact sports training is allowed in groups of 10. In Western Australia up to 20 people can partake in fitness and non-contact sports, swim in public pools or gather at community facilities. Overseas travel still isn't on the cards to be resuming anytime soon. We've heard estimates about overseas travel not returning before 2021, and even that air travel might not fully go back to normal until 2023. But for now, all overseas travel is currently banned and exceptions to the rule are few and far between. There's a chance we could be able to visit New Zealand before international borders completely reopen, but there's no guarantees on that right now.  That dream overseas holiday will have to wait a little while longer. Every state and territory is rolling back their restrictions differently. Within that, each business is coming up with their own plans to meet requirements based on their particular location, facilities, staff and style of operation. National Cabinet is reviewing the progress of easing restrictions regularly, as are state and territory governments, so there is a chance that restrictions could remain in place or even be brought back if safety is at risk. If you're not sure about something, check your state or territory government's website or contact the business directly to ask how they're doing things. 
Donald Trump replaces Mick Mulvaney as White House chief of staff, taps Mark Meadows
US President Donald Trump has parted ways with acting White House chief of staff Mick Mulvaney and replaced him with conservative congressman and close ally Mark Meadows. Mr Meadows takes over as the White House deals with the unfolding coronavirus crisis and as Mr Trump prepares for a re-election contest in November. He becomes the fourth chief of staff in Mr Trump's three years in office, tasked with attempting to bring order to a chaotic presidency. Mr Meadows is a member of the US House of Representatives from North Carolina and was a combative defender of the President during the impeachment saga, so much so that Mr Trump singled him out for praise after the Republican-led Senate acquitted the President. "He's a tremendously talented man, not just as a politician. As a human being, he's incredible," Mr Trump said at the time. Mr Trump named Mr Mulvaney to be his special US envoy to Northern Ireland amid preparations to welcome Irish Prime Minister Leo Varadkar to Washington for St Patrick's Day ceremonies later this month. A former senior administration official said the change had been a long time in the works and was a "done deal" some time ago. Mr Trump announced the move just after arriving at his Mar-a-Lago Club in Palm Beach, Florida, where he is spending the weekend. Mr Trump had long groused about Mr Mulvaney, who angered the President last year by saying at a White House news conference that Mr Trump had sought to persuade Ukraine to investigate Democratic rival Joe Biden by withholding US aid to Ukraine. What Mr Mulvaney said ran counter to Mr Trump's argument  that there was no "quid pro quo" with Ukraine. Mr Mulvaney quickly walked back the statement, but the damage was done. Mr Mulvaney, a conservative former South Carolina politician, did last more than a year as acting chief of staff after replacing retired General John Kelly, who had succeeded Reince Priebus in the job. He was named acting chief of staff in December 2018 and Mr Trump never made the appointment permanent. A source familiar with the situation said both Mr Mulvaney and Mr Meadows flew aboard Air Force One with Mr Trump to North Carolina on Monday and there was little warmth between the two men. There's no shame in being confused by the system. Plenty of Americans are, too. Mr Trump did not speak to Mr Mulvaney, the source said. Mr Meadows announced in December he would not run for re-election this year. "This was the most orchestrated personnel change so far. Since the Northern Ireland deal was announced at the same time, this was clearly a mutual decision," Sean Spicer, Mr Trump's former White House press secretary, said. Mr Spicer said Mr Meadows had a clear understanding of Mr Trump's style and agenda. ABC/Reuters 
Under financial pressure and slipping into conspiracies, why Instagram influencers promote coronavirus lockdown protests
Former Married at First Sight contestant and Instagram influencer Amanda Micallef has spread COVID-19 misinformation online, but experts say this kind of behaviour and susceptibility to conspiracy theories give us an insight into what can happen to human thinking "under crisis conditions". Recently, she shared a video of another former reality TV contestant speculating that the coronavirus was a ruse to get rid of physical money and added her own caption. "I wholeheartedly believe that the Corona Virus [sic] is the beginning of world control," she wrote. A few weeks ago, fed up with being locked down, Ms Micallef visited an anti-5G Facebook group and advocated for an anti-lockdown protest. The protest never happened, after Victoria Police visited her and warned her against organising the event. But despite the warning from authorities, Ms Micallef remains extremely sceptical of coronavirus lockdowns. "Health precautions my arse, I don't believe in it, I never have and I don't think I ever will," she said. Several social media figures in Australia have gone from posting recipes and workouts to posting wild claims about coronavirus, including chef Pete Evans who was fined $25,000 by Therapeutic Goods Administration last month over misleading claims relating to a light machine called a BioCharger. Ms Micallef said the initial urge to encourage people to ignore lockdown restrictions came from a place of frustration. "Being locked down, having my business and my income heavily impacted and then having more time on my hands to go and research the rabbit holes a little bit further," she said. "What people need to understand is regardless of me being a public figure or not, I too am a human being [and] am heavily impacted financially by this whole lockdown." University of Melbourne social anthropologist James Rose said people were more likely to take up conspiracy theories during stressful conditions, such as those presenting themselves in the pandemic. "What happens under crisis conditions is that people who would otherwise have healthy patterns of thinking, begin to find themselves drawn towards conspiratorial patterns of thinking," he said. "It's because their existing idea systems have begun to break down under pressure and are no longer sufficient to explain what's going on around them. "To explain why they've lost their job, why they're experiencing stress and why daily life has become so unpredictable." Dr Rose said social media  and the power it gives to people to broadcast their views  plays a part in disseminating misinformation. "The only requirement for fringe ideas to become popular is the number of followers that a proponent of that idea has," he said. "In the case of this conspiracy theory linking 5G communications to coronavirus, what we see is at least in relation to the Melbourne protests, the organiser was a contestant on a TV cooking show. "As a consequence of that, they had a large number of followers, so when this person slipped into a conspiratorial way of thinking, all of their followers were exposed to it." Dr Rose is referencing former cooking show contestant Fanos Panayides, who was arrested at last week's anti-lockdown protests. This week Mr Panayides has encouraged Australians tosmash their TVsin defiance of the mainstream media. Around the country, some people have reported that friends they would not expect to believe conspiracy theories, have started to believe them. Lee*, who wished to remain anonymous, said she had seen an increase in friends posting conspiracy theory-related content online since the lockdowns began. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "Definitely people I would not normally see posting things about conspiracy theories," she said. "That's what's surprised me the most  especially conspiracy theories around medical things." When she posted an article refuting some of the claims being made by her friends she was inundated by friends chastising her. "I had a lot of people commenting, a lot of friends commenting back to me, telling me I needed to wake up and do my research and telling me that they'd gone deep and they'd found information about it," she said. Dr Rose said the rise of views that were once considered fringe could be viewed as maladaptive coping strategies to rising incidences of poor mental health. "There is always some degree of conspiratorial thinking in a national population, normally it only affects a small number of people, who may have other underlying mental health conditions or they may be subject to other protracted or acute stressors because of personal circumstances," he said. "That's because their existing idea systems have begun to break down under pressure, they're no longer sufficient to explain what's going on around them." *name has been changed to protect their identity. 
Australia-China trade stoush over coronavirus inquiry puts exports  and more at risk
Exports from four major beef facilities have been suspended, barley has been threatened with tariffs of 80 per cent and wine producers are worried they will not be able to sell their top drops. China's apparent displeasure at Prime Minister Scott Morrison's calls for an inquiry into the origin of COVID-19 is ramping up and it's feared many more industries could be at risk, adding to the pressure from the coronavirus economic slowdown. Here is a rundown of what's happening in China-Australia trade relations. China is by far Australia's biggest export market, taking about 30 per cent of Australia's exports by value. According to recent Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade figures, China takes $79.5 billion worth of Australian iron ore, $13.8 billion worth of coal and $16 billion in natural gas exports. In 2017-18 Australia exported $123.3 billion in goods and services to China, equal to about 6.7 per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The Chinese steel mills are engineered to take particular blends of ore that Australia supplies making it unlikely China would shift away to other suppliers, but the flow of Chinese students and tourists to our shores is under threat, as are exports of primary produce and consumer goods. There are over 12,000 Australian exporters selling goods to China either directly or via Hong Kong and over 3,000 Australian businesses based there. Australia's top trading partners: China also imports $2.67 billion in Australian beef, just slightly more than Japan. In fact, Japan does pip China for the slice of our resources in the coal and natural gas sectors as well, but again, not by a huge margin. Coal is the biggest where Japan's $17.05 billion of Australian coal imports is $3 billion more than China's. But both countries are way ahead of the next market, India, at just $10.61 billion. Australia's top goods exports: Biggest trading partners by top export: Iron ore Coal Natural gas Gold Beef Any sanctions or tariff hikes on Australian products will likely hit our grain, wine, dairy and seafood sectors which rely heavily on China as well. Chinese authorities have so far ignored attempts by the Morrison Government to reach out and discuss trade tensions. Trade Minister Simon Birmingham confirmed his Chinese counterpart Zhong Shan had not responded to his requests for a meeting. Prime Minister Scott Morrison described the current situation as "obviously a difficult time". He also said Australia "will always do the right thing when it comes to respecting other countries' laws". "We always respect the sovereignty of other nations and we simply expect the same in return and I think thats a pretty fair deal," he said. Although Australia would suffer some pretty severe economic fallout if China pulled the plug, UNSW Business School economics fellow and lecturer Tim Harcourt reckons our strong relationship with other Asian countries will see us through. "We're not alone. Most countries have been engaging heavily with China because it's the story of the Asian century, over 10 per cent growth [per annum] over 20 years, why wouldn't you?" Mr Harcourt said. "The difficulty with China you get a mix of geopolitics with commercial decisions. "With barley, Australia provides a fifth of China's barley  Any dispute around that has probably been around for about 18 months and China has chosen the corona spat to go in hard. "This talk of barley and beef, it's really just going to hurt China. "China has got great issues with energy security and food security. China would be aware Australia can shift over to Japan and South Korea pretty quickly. "China has got a billion people that need energy, food, quality education for their children." It might seem like the PM's enthusiasm for an inquiry into the origin of coronavirus  widely believed to be in the Chinese city of Wuhan  has prompted this retaliation, but this has all happened before. In any case, Mr Morrison is not giving up, saying Australia would always "stand our ground when it comes to the things we believe in" and "reach out to the rest of the world and seek to deal with it fairly, honestly and openly". UNSW Law's China International Business and Economic Law Centre co-director Professor Heng Wang said countries like Korea, Japan, Norway and Canada have all copped some kind of animosity from China. And France has been on the receiving end, too, of late. "It's not uncommon and the solution almost always depends on time and the relationship between the countries, and in most cases, it's hard to address in a short time," he said. "A more constructive way is to use the RCEP  Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership  the only one China is involved in. It's a regional free trade agreement among 16 countries that will deliver substantial new trade and investment opportunities for Australia in the Indo-Pacific region. "[These sorts of trade stoushes are] increasingly common if you don't have a trade-based agreement." China's Ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingyer described Mr Morrison's global coronavirus inquiry as "dangerous" and undermining of the global fight against the pandemic. He warned Chinese people might have second thoughts about trips to Australia and parents might not want to send their children to a hostile country. After banning imports from four Australian abattoirs, Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said China Customs detected repeated violations of inspection and quarantine requirements agreed by Chinese and Australian authorities. "To safeguard Chinese consumers' health and safety, China has decided to suspend effectively immediately, processing four Australian companies' import declarations for meat products," he said. "The relevant Australian department has been informed of this decision. "The Chinese side has asked the Australian side to conduct a thorough investigation to find the cause and address the issue. You may get more specifics from the competent Chinese authorities." All this sparks the question of why we are so concerned about one country refusing our produce. Mr Harcourt said there is a bit more work to do in diversification of our export markets, but it's not all doom and gloom, and we haven't put all our beef and barley into one paddock. "We have developed reasonable alternative markets  we have reasonable trade with South Korea, we're best of mates with Japan," he said. "For Australia it's been the engagement with Asia, not just China  the power of proximity, not the tyranny of distance. "I think there's a bit of diplomacy to do and a bit of diversification. [Trade Minister] Simon Birmingham is a level-headed smart guy and he will work through the usual channels commercially. "The beef industry will start again. There's some technical issues they'll get over. The beef producers have been quite measured. The average Chinese consumer loves Aussie beef, so do the Japanese and the Koreans. It's a quality product. "And, when you think about the nuts and blots of this, I would have thought the beneficiaries of a call for an inquiry into how a pandemic started would be the Chinese people, given how many people were harmed in Wuhan." 
Kids in East Africa are having their hair done to resemble coronavirus to raise awareness
The coronavirus has revived a hairstyle in East Africa, one with braided spikes that echo the virus' distinctive shape. The style's growing popularity is in part due to economic hardships linked to virus restrictions. It is cheap, mothers say, and helps with the goal of spreading awareness that the coronavirus is real. The hairstyle had gone out of fashion in recent years, as imported real and synthetic hair from India, China and Brazil began to flood the market and demand by local women increased. Pictures of the flowing or braided imported styles are tacked up in beauty salons across much of Africa. But now, in a makeshift salon beside a busy road in Kibera  a slum in the heart of the Kenyan capital Nairobi  24-year-old hairdresser Sharon Refa braids young girls' hair into the antennae-like spikes that people call the "coronavirus hairstyle". Girls shift in the plastic chairs as she tugs at their scalps. "Some grown-ups don't believe that the coronavirus is real, but then most young children appear keen to sanitise their hands and wear masks," Ms Refa said. "So many adults do not do this, and that is why we came up with the corona hairstyle." Kenya's number of confirmed virus cases was nearing 700 as of Monday. With the widespread shortage of testing materials, however, the real number of cases could be higher. Health officials are especially worried about the possible spread of the virus in crowded slums. Mothers like Margaret Andeya, who is struggling to make ends meet, said the coronavirus hairstyle suits her daughters' styling needs and her pocket. Virus-related restrictions have stifled the daily work for millions of people with little or no savings. "This hairstyle is much more affordable for people like me who cannot afford to pay for the more expensive hairstyles out there and yet we want our kids to look stylish," Ms Andeya said. It costs 50 shillings, or about 70 cents, to get the braids, while the average hairdo costs between $4.30 and $7.25. That's money most people in Kibera cannot afford at the moment. The technique used in braiding the coronavirus hairstyle is threading, which uses yarn instead of synthetic hair braids. This is the secret to making it affordable, residents said. "COVID-19 has destroyed the economy, taken our jobs from us, and now money is scarce," 26-year-old Mariam Rashid said. "I therefore decided to have my child's hair done up like this at an affordable 50 shillings, and she looks good. "The hairstyle also helps in communicating with the public about the virus." ABC/AP 
How coronavirus restrictions have given us a new spin on language
People love creating words  in times of crisis it's a "sick" (in the good sense) way of pulling through. From childhood, our "linguistic life has been one willingly given over to language play" (in the words of David Crystal). In fact, scientists have recently found learning new words can stimulate exactly those same pleasure circuits in our brain as sex, gambling, drugs and eating (the pleasure-associated region called the ventral striatum). We're leximaniacs at heart and, while the behaviour can occasionally seem dark, we can learn a thing or two by reflecting on those playful coinages that get us through "dicky" times. In the past, hard times birthed playful rhymes. The 1930s Depression gave us playful reduplications based on Australian landmarks and towns  "ain't no work in Bourke"; "everything's wrong at Wollongong"; "things are crook at Tallarook". Wherever we're facing the possibility of being "dicky" or "Tom [and] Dick" (rhyming slang for "sick"), we take comfort in language play.  It's one thing to feel "crook", but it's another thing again to feel as "crook as Rookwood" (a cemetery in Sydney) or to have a "wog" (synonymous with "bug", likely from "pollywog", and unrelated to the Italian/Greek "wog"). Remedies may be found in language's abilities to translate sores into plasters, to paraphrase William Gouge's 1631 sermon on the plague. New slang enables us to face our fears head-on  just as when the Parisians began calling a late-18th century influenza "la grippe" to reflect the "seizing" effect it had on people. The word was subsequently taken up in British and American English. In these times of COVID-19, there are the usual suspects: shortenings like "sanny" (hand sanitiser) and "iso" (isolation), abbreviations like BCV (before corona virus) and WFH (working from home), also compounds "corona moaner" (the whingers) and "zoombombing" (the intrusion into a video conference). Plenty of nouns have been "verbed" too  the toilet paper/pasta/tinned tomatoes have been "magpied". Even rhyming slang has made a bit of a comeback with Miley Cyrus lending her name to the virus (already end-clipped to "the Miley"). Some combine more than one process  "the isodesk" (or is that "the isobar") is where many of us are currently spending our days. What is interesting about COVID-lingo is the large number of creations that are blended expressions formed by combining two existing words.  The new portmanteau then incorporates meaningful characteristics from both. Newly spawned "coronials" (corona + millennials) has the predicted baby boom in late 2020 already covered. "Blursday" has been around since at least 2007 but originally described the day spent hung over  it's now been pressed into service because no-one knows what day of the week it is anymore. The official disease name itself, "COVID", is somewhere between a blend and an acronym because it takes in vowels to make the abbreviation pronounceable (CO from corona, VI from virus and D from disease). True, we've been doing this sort of thing for centuries  "flush" (flash + gush) dates from the 1500s. But it's never been a terribly significant method of coinage.  John Algeo's study of neologisms over a 50-year period (194191) showed blends counting for only 5 per cent of the new words.  Tony Thorne's impressive collection of more than 100 COVID-related terms has around 34 per cent blends, and the figure increases to more than 40 per cent if we consider only slang. Not only have blends become much more common, the nature of the mixing process has changed too. Rather than combining splinters of words, as in "coronials", most of these corona-inspired mixes combine full words merged with parts of others. The "quarantini" keeps the word "quarantine" intact and follows it with just a hint of "martini" (and for that extra boost to the immune system you can rim the glass with vitamin C powder). Many of these have bubbled up over the past few weeks  "lexit" or "covexit" (the strategies around exiting lockdown and economic hardship), "coronacation" (working from home) and so on. Humour emerges as a prevailing feature of these blends, even more so when the overlap is total.  Words like 'iso' and 'quazzie' could be helping Australians cope with coronavirus. In "covidiot" (the one who ignores public health advice and probably hoards toilet paper), both "covid" and "idiot" remain intact. There's been a flourishing of these types of blend  "covideo party", "coronapocalypse", "covidivorce" to name just a few. Clearly, there is a fair bit of dark comedy in the jokes and memes that abound on the internet, and in many of these coinages too  compounds like "coronacoma" (for the period of shutdown, or that deliciously long quarantine sleep) and "boomer remover" (used by younger generations for the devastation of the baby boomer demographic). Callous, heartless, yes. But humour is often used as a means of coming to terms with the less happy aspects of our existence. People use the levity as a way of disarming anxiety and discomfort by downgrading what it is they cannot cope with. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Certainly, gallows humour has always featured large in hospital slang (diagnoses like GOK "God only knows" and PFO "pissed and fell over"). For those who have to deal with dying and death every day, it is perhaps the only way to stay sane. COVID challenges us all to confront the biological limits of our own bodies  and these days humour provides the much-needed societal safety valve. So what will come of these creations? The vast majority will fall victim to "verbicide", as slang expressions always do. Kate Burridge is Professor of linguistics at Monash University and Howard Manns is a lecturer in linguistics at Monash University. The pair wrote this piece for The Conversation, where it was originally published. 
Being a paramedic during the coronavirus crisis  when disappearing isn't an option
To survive in the unpredictable world of stabbings, shootings, road accidents and drug and alcohol violence, paramedics develop a nose for danger. Our instinct and priority is to shield ourselves from it first. Running into a burning building might seem heroic, but you can't help a soul when you're dead. When I picked up my first suspected case of COVID-19 four weeks ago, I felt like the canary in the coalmine. Our patient was in his late 60s, a former sailor with a missing leg. We knew it was serious. Sailors don't often call ambulances  especially Moby Dick kind of sailors  unless they're really dying. What's a mere flu after wrestling whales? After hearing his coughing and spluttering from the door, we returned to the ambulance and put on our personal protective equipment (PPE). It felt like a pivotal moment  one I wasn't too comfortable with. It made me think of my escape plan. Back in 2003, I'd done a training course for chemical, biological and radioactive emergencies. Learning about the effects of nerve agents on the human body was alarming. Stuck in my head to this day is the mnemonic SLUDGE: salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, gastric emptying, emesis  basically, leaking from every orifice. It's no wonder my classmates and I had second thoughts. We decided to keep Aloha shirts, emblazoned with palm trees and sunsets, in our ambulances just in case an incident like this actually happened. Then, we could put them on and walk away from the ambulance, disappear into the crowd  vanish for our own survival. It's wasn't cowardly, just sensible. Remember DR ABC from your first aid course? Danger  remove the danger, or yourself from danger. The night we picked up the sailor, I thought of my Aloha shirt, and wondered if this was the moment to put it on. For a second the idea made me smile, but of course it was a fantasy. Running away was never a serious option.  Radio National Fictions is the ABC's place for creative audio fiction. We deal in the hilarious, the gritty and sometimes the dystopian. Think of it as movies for your ears. Instead I would do what most paramedics were doing: curse quietly, protect myself as best I could, then go join the battle. A month on, emergencies like car accidents and sporting injuries are down, because people are cocooned in isolation. We respond along empty highways reclaimed by insects. When we arrive at a house with a suspected COVID-19 case, we don our masks and gloves, goggles and gowns. It takes time. The curtains of neighbouring houses twitch. Fearful eyes stare down. But we can't rush our work. There's a system we follow: the order of PPE application and removal, how we dispose of face-shields and garments, the meticulous cleaning of ourselves and our vehicles. But no matter the care we take or how disciplined we are with wiping down, some people out there see us as lepers.  At the height of the coronavirus outbreak, we followed the city's paramedics into the homes of the sick and dying. No wonder our usual workload of anxious people has dropped. To many we are now the ones they fear the most, thinking we carry the virus. They give us the widest berth in the mall and cross the street to avoid us. Last week, a customer at a supermarket called a paramedic friend of mine a "spreader". When my work partner says she's hungry and wants to stop by Woollies in the ambulance I offer to go in for her. "I have my shirt," I tell her. "My Aloha shirt." But she's not convinced. "Who wears Hawaiian shirts over blue uniform trousers with reflective stripes?" she replies, shaking her head. "No point going undercover unless you do it right." My initial anxieties have begun to settle. The Australian coronavirus disaster hasn't materialised, at least not so far. I heard a man outside my coffee shop call it a "fizzer". The sailor we picked up on our first night tested negative, as have most of those I've treated. So far only one paramedic in the country has been infected. We've played our cards right and we're winning the game  though it won't take much for things to go south if we get cocky about it. After work I take my uniform off at the ambulance station and leave my boots in my locker. My wife doesn't like me hugging the children or touching anything at all without a shower. Even then, when I try and kiss her on the lips she turns her head and gives me her cheek. "Sorry! Corona!" she says, cheerfully as she can. It could just be an excuse to avoid my kisses, but if it's fear, I understand. Just as I'm protecting myself from patients, she's protecting herself from me. D for danger, I know.  Maybe it will end up being the lack of kisses, rather than coronavirus, that compels me to put on my Aloha shirt and walk into the sunset. Benjamin Gilmour is a paramedic and author. His most recent book is The Gap. Get more stories that go beyond the news cycle with our weekly newsletter. 
Queensland roadside campers use vines, sticks and rope to quarantine during coronavirus pandemic
While the country faces its most serious health crisis in living memory, 62-year-old Steve Johnstone uses a thin piece of rope around a dusty ute to quarantine himself. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Each morning he washes in the ocean, sits down with a first aid kit and checks his temperature to reassure himself he does not have coronavirus.  "We have nowhere else to go," Mr Johnstone said.  The Far North Queensland man is one of about 15 people living in cars and tents at a campsite between Ellis Beach and the Captain Cook Highway, 30 kilometres north of Cairns. With most other campgrounds and caravan parks in the region closed due to COVID-19, the spot has become a temporary haven for pensioners, homeless people and backpackers during the pandemic.  Dead branches and tree vines have been used to section off sites so the occupants can comply with social distancing rules, in the hope they will not be forced to move on.  "I don't have a home to quarantine so I've made this my home until I can find accommodation," Mr Johnstone said.  Unemployed and living off a disability pension, Mr Johnstone said he could not afford accommodation options offered to him by the Queensland Housing Department and other homeless support services in the area.  "The only other place I can probably go to is a deserted house and squat in it, which I don't want to do.  With no toilets or showers at the campsite he was also concerned about the health and safety of occupants but said this was his lifestyle until the pandemic passed. "I'm pretty sure they can open up some caravan parks or the Cairns Showgrounds for people like us. "It's not really possible for us to quarantine if people are coming and going.  "If you get corona your cards are definitely up, especially when you're my age." But others at the site said they had chosen to settle there and believed it was the safest option during the pandemic.  German backpacker Jannik Zintarra has been camping at the site for two weeks.  "At the beginning we were in a hostel, but there were way too many people for us so we decided to go to a camp ground.  "So many [other campgrounds] are closed so we ended up here.  "We could do Airbnb but that's very expensive and we're trying to save money because we just can't find a job at the moment."  Mr Zintarra said they were trying to help each other out, making trips to the nearest town to buy food and essential items for elderly campers.  Members of the Ellis Beach and Buchans Point community have raised concerns about the campground with Queensland Police Service (QPS) and the Transport Department.   A police spokesperson said officers were aware of the situation, but some of the campers had nowhere else to go.  "We won't be taking any action against them especially in the current climate," the spokesperson said.  "They're doing really a pretty good job with what they've got.  "Whilst they're there and doing the right thing, at least we know they're not moving around and spreading the virus."  The Cairns Regional Council said it had received 29 complaints relating to illegal camping in the past three weeks and 11 resulted in move-on requests.  "Council is taking an educational and flexible approach to those people, such as grey nomads and travelling backpackers, who may have found themselves without a place to stay as a result of coronavirus restrictions," a spokesman said.  The Queensland Transport Department said it was working closely with the QPS and Cairns Regional Council to determine the best approach to managing camping in roadside areas. A spokesperson said the situation at Ellis Beach would be monitored and enforcement action would be carried out if necessary.  On March 26, the Queensland Government announced $24.7 million to help specialist homelessness services provide immediate housing support to vulnerable residents during the COVID-19 crisis, but the amount distributed in Far North Queensland was unclear.   The ABC has contacted homelessness services including Mission Australia and Anglicare but has not received a response.  
Hundreds die in Iran over false belief drinking methanol cures coronavirus
Health workers in Iran are warning people to not fall for coronavirus hoaxes, after 700 people died from alcohol poisoning amid claims drinking bootleg liquor can keep the virus at bay. A report released by the Iranian Government earlier this month showed alcohol poisoning over a two-month period was 10 times the number of cases during the whole of 2019, likely spurred by the COVID-19 epidemic. The national coroner's authority said alcohol poisoning killed 728 Iranians between February 20 and April 7. Last year there were only 66 deaths from alcohol poisoning, according to the report. "People think that alcohol causes immunity to corona, while drinking alcohol does not eliminate corona in the body," a medical expert recently told the Government-aligned Tasnim News Agency.  "This misconception has caused even children to drink alcohol  which can lead to death and blindness." Along with Turkey, Iran is facing one of the worst coronavirus outbreaks in the Middle East with 5,806 deaths and more than 91,000 confirmed cases. Iranian health ministry spokesman Kianoush Jahanpour said 525 people had died from swallowing toxic methanol alcohol since February 20, according to local state TV. He said a total of 5,011 people had been poisoned from methanol alcohol, adding that about 90 people had lost their eyesight or were suffering eye damage from the alcohol poisoning. Fake remedies have spread across social media in Iran, where people remain deeply suspicious of the Government after it downplayed the crisis before it overwhelmed the country. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. The Iranian Government mandates that manufacturers of toxic methanol add an artificial colour to their products so the public can tell it apart from ethanol, the kind of alcohol that can be used in cleaning wounds. Ethanol is also the kind of alcohol found in alcoholic beverages, though its production is illegal in Iran, where consumption of alcohol is prohibited under strict Islamic law. Minority Christians, Jews and Zoroastrians may drink alcoholic drinks in private, however, and there is a bootleg industry. Some bootleggers in Iran use methanol, adding a splash of bleach to mask the added colour before selling it as drinkable. Sometimes it is mixed with consumable alcohol to stretch supply, other times it comes as methanol, falsely advertised as drinkable. Methanol also can contaminate traditionally fermented alcohol. Methanol poisoning causes delayed organ and brain damage and can cause symptoms like chest pain, hyperventilation, blindness and inducing a coma. "Other countries have only one problem, which is the new coronavirus pandemic. But we are fighting on two fronts here," said Dr Hossein Hassanian, an adviser to Iran's Health Ministry.  "We have to both cure the people with alcohol poisoning and also fight the coronavirus." In response to the coronavirus outbreak, Iran's Government announced it would allow an increase in the production of alcohol for medical purposes. The country currently has more than 40 alcohol-producing factories that have been allocated to pharmaceutical companies and the sanitising of items. Even before the outbreak, the Iranian economy was struggling under severe US sanctions, blocking the sale of its crude oil abroad and limiting medical supplies. On Thursday, US President Donald Trump came under fire for suggesting the possibility of injecting disinfectant to cure coronavirus, causing an international uproar with government agencies rushing to put out warnings against consuming disinfectants like bleach. ABC/AP 
Country postie delivers smile and some love to Tasmania's coronavirus hotspot
On her country mail run Jocelyn Flint delivers letters, boxes of wine, flat pack queen-size beds, asthma puffers, and even biscuits for morning tea. With about 5,000 people in quarantine in Tasmania's North West, there's a strict stay-at-home order for everyone in the region and Ms Flint is a welcome sight as she does her rounds. "I've been getting quite a few thankyous the past couple of days," Ms Flint said. Cheryl Willie lives with her husband on the Redpa dairy farm run by her son, Rohan. They've got 300 Friesian cows on prime, lush green dairying country. She loves catching up with Ms Flint, especially at the moment. "We couldn't do without her  because she's the only person we're seeing in isolation," Ms Willie said. Ms Willie is one of about 300 farms and households on Ms Flint's postal route on the north-west tip of Tasmania. "It's always good to see the mail lady, as we call her," Mr Willie said. Even more so now that the north west of Tasmania is in lockdown due to a COVID-19 outbreak. "A lot of people rely on her pretty much," Mr Willie said. Ms Flint is delivering all kinds of things and often a bit extra. "I'm doing a lot more deliveries at the moment, people aren't leaving home and they're ringing me and I'm picking up stuff for them," she said. Nothing is too big or too small for this country postie, but sometimes it is a squeeze getting stuff into the back of her small four-wheel drive. Yesterday it was a flat pack queen-size bed, the other day a flat screen tv, some medication for cows, and an asthma puffer. Since the coronavirus outbreak, it is taking her longer to do the run  but it's not just because of the increase in parcels. "I'm always having a yack, got to catch up, and I'm full of news. I can tell them what's going on around the place. I know everything," Ms Flint said. It's pretty social and she gets plenty of laughs along the way. Farmers in this country put a bit of effort into the designs of their letterboxes. One farmer on the route built a letterbox in the shape of an army tank. Often this postie will go to extra lengths to deliver to her clients, dropping things off at the door rather than the roadside post box. Sometimes the requests are a bit cheeky, like the one for a packet of biscuits for a famer's morning tea. "When I got to the mailbox, there was an envelope in there and there were cow muck fingerprints all over it and a lot of five-cent coins," Ms Flint said. In her spare time, Ms Flint is a horsewoman. She's part of a posse of local stockmen and women who volunteer to move cattle from Robbins Island to mainland Tasmania. It's an 11-kilometre route that she knows well and it sees the cattle and drovers winding their way between pooling seawater and a rushing incoming tide. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "You never get over the scenery, it's beautiful. It's just so different every time," she said. A knee operation forced her out of the saddle recently and she missed the last muster. "I'll be on the horse soon," she said. In the meantime this stockwoman and country postie is playing a big part in keeping North West Tassie people happy in trying times. 
Wheatbelt businesses benefit from regional COVID-19 travel restrictions as more people buy local
Despite restrictions on local businesses and COVID-19 travel restrictions, some Wheatbelt businesses are stronger than before because of local support. In Northam, about 100 kilometres east of Perth, many businesses did better during the strictest period of Western Australia's regional border closures, according to Northam Chamber of Commerce CEO, Esther Bliss. "There's been a lot of businesses in town that have done very well because people aren't going down the hill and have been able to buy local," she said. "Something we have been screaming at them [about] for years, the businesses have seen a great number of people who have never been in their stores before, coming in." Avon Valley Contractors is a stock feed, garden and bike shop that has been operating in Northam for four years. Owner Enrika Grogan said April was their best month of business ever. "April was up 22 per cent so that would be a massive profit margin for us  that is huge," she said. "Normally 6 to 7 per cent  that's kind of where you're tracking." The business diversified into a bike shop by chance last year and Ms Grogan said they had been so busy they had to employ another staff member in the midst of the pandemic. "We've kind of been continually adding to the business because when you're in a country town or community you kind of have to be ready to pivot very easily, you can't stay doing the same thing," she said. "Everyone in town is feeling that and anyone that maybe would have lost business to Perth has gained people who may have travelled down the hill." At Lucy's Cafe on the main street of Northam, owner Jess Joy said when COVID-19 restrictions were first introduced, they had to diversify their business by making ready-to-go meals. She said their loyal customer base meant they were able to survive. "Our customers have been amazing," Ms Joy said. "We might usually have someone get their own lunch but they've encouraged their workplace to get lunch and things like that, so the community has been awesome." Ms Bliss said the pandemic had been a learning curve for regional businesses. "You cannot just rely on things as they always had been, because we are in a time where this has never happened before," she said. "So the lesson learnt is to always continuously be improving your business and always looking at alternative revenue streams and not putting all your eggs in one basket." 
Latrobe Valley patients incorrectly billed for COVID-19 tests from pop-up medical centre 
A pop-up medical centre in the Latrobe Valley has incorrectly charged several of its patients a medical fee for COVID-19 testing. According to the Department of Health and Human Services, testing for the virus is free at public health facilities, mobile testing centres or GP bulk-billing clinics. Pensioner Sandra Dick, from Churchill, received an invoice from the Mid Valley Walk-through testing facility in Morwell, which is operated by Dorevitch Pathology. She said she was billed $91.80 after she was tested for coronavirus. "I received the bill in the mail, and it shocked me a bit because I was under the impression that it was free," Ms Dick said. "When I got the account, I was sort of a bit stunned because the doctor who supposedly referred me and the pathologist  I'd never heard of either of them." Independent State MP for Morwell, Russell Northe, said a number of concerned patients contacted his office about the issue, claiming Dorevitch did not bother to address the matter. "People were supposed to be informed via text or other means that it was a mistake but unfortunately there has been a cohort of people that haven't received that message," he said. "It's just imperative that every single person that was tested at that Mid Valley clinic has subsequently been advised by the authorities that they're not required to pay that bill." A spokesman from Dorevitch said patients were wrongfully billed due to a technical system glitch and a round of text messages have been sent to the patients advising them to disregard the bill. He said patients who do not receive texts will be phoned or a letter will be posted to their address. 
SA's last remaining COVID-19 patient leaves Royal Adelaide Hospital
South Australia's last remaining COVID-19 patient has left the Royal Adelaide Hospital, in what nurses say is a miracle recovery. Paul Faraguna, 68, the first COVID-19 patient to be admitted to intensive care and the last to walk out, was farewelled by staff from the infectious diseases ward with a standing ovation on Thursday afternoon. Mr Faraguna was admitted to hospital just over two months ago, after contracting the coronavirus aboard the Ruby Princess cruise ship. He was admitted to intensive care six days later, suffering organ failure and placed in an induced coma. "The doctors were unable to say what my future would be if I survived, even suggesting that I may have brain damage and be permanently disabled," he said in a statement. The Royal Adelaide Hospital's Nurse Unit Manager, Karen Shutz, said Mr Faraguna's journey was a rollercoaster for him and his family.  "We honestly didn't think he'd make it through, but to see him come out the other side is just the most amazing gift you can have out of this pandemic," Ms Shutz said. "He is one amazing, resilient gentleman, who I don't think I've ever seen him be down at all in the whole time he's been here with us. "It was just such a huge boost that somebody had made it out the other side who was really sick, so yeah, there were a few tears as he was walking out this afternoon." Mr Farugna is now headed for further treatment and rehabilitation at Modbury Hospital. "The only challenge left is to walk normally again, which should, I feel, happen in the near future due to my physiotherapy program," he said. SA Health hasn't recorded any new cases of coronavirus for two-weeks. The total number of COVID-19 cases detected in South Australia remains 439, but there are no longer any known active cases of the disease in South Australia. But SA Health continues to urge people to maintain social distancing and good hand, cough and sneeze hygiene practices. Health authorities also want anyone in SA with even only mild flu-like symptoms  or who have lost the sense of taste or smell  to get tested for COVID-19. 
Retired nurse denied COVID-19 travel exemption to care for dying sister reunited with her at last
Huddled together, tears flowing and words of love being whispered, a reunion between two sisters in a small New South Wales town marks the end of a nearly two-month battle to grant a dying wish. After five travel exemption applications, two weeks of self-isolation in Sydney and two negative results for COVID-19, it's been an arduous journey for Christine Archer to be at the side of her terminally ill sister, Gail Baker. On Wednesday afternoon, the retired New Zealand nurse finally made it to the NSW Mid North Coast village of Bowraville. "Words can't explain how I feel," Ms Archer said.  "I'm just so happy that I finally got to be here and be with her.  "The last two weeks have been the hardest or the longest two weeks of my life I think."  Ms Archer was granted a COVID-19 travel exemption on May 1 to fly from New Zealand to care for her younger sister, who has advanced ovarian cancer. The approval came after four rejections by the Department of Home Affairs.  For Ms Baker, the ordeal was "demoralising", as she faced the possibility of dying alone in hospital without her sister.  Ms Baker's terminal diagnosis had already forced her to give up her decades-long career as a midwife, and the rejections of her sister's application had left her disheartened. But, she said, the approval of the fifth application restored her hope her sister would be able to come to Australia to be with her.  "I didn't have much hope [Christine] would be let into the country, so it was a huge relief," Ms Baker said.  "At the time I honestly didn't think I would last a week or two. I was very ill." As she sat in her living room and reminisced with her older sister over a cuppa, surrounded by her only daughter, grandchildren and dogs, Ms Baker said it was exactly how she wanted to live out her final weeks and months.  "That is my dying wish, and it's why I couldn't wait to get out of the hospital, because I thought I was going to die in there," she said.  "I want to be here with my dogs and my sister and [daughter] Erica, who is a bit frightened of death. She hasn't had much to do with that and I don't want her to be frightened." Ms Baker's daughter, Erica Peterson, said it was a mixture of relief and happiness to see her mother and aunt reunited after what had been a difficult six weeks.  She said hoped that as the pandemic continued no-one else would have to endure a similar experience.  "If somebody is dying or if there is some exceptional circumstance, please let people's families be with them," she said.  "People need to be with their families at horrible times like these." 
Community sports clubs worried refunds and higher operating costs will finish them post COVID-19
Community sports clubs are working on plans to restart seasons after a coronavirus-induced pause, but for some clubs the starting whistle may never ring out again. Clubs and industry bodies are calling for additional support Time was called on community and grassroots sports in March as regulations were introduced to limit the impact of COVID-19. League, union, soccer, netball and hockey, among other team sports, have been on hold ever since. Bundaberg Hockey Association president Des Barritt said revenue was down significantly, with associations, clubs and sponsors fighting to remain viable. "Our revenue from the bar and canteen is what [usually] sort of helps prop us up in meeting our financial commitments for the year, because we've still got rates, insurance, our groundsmen  even though we're not playing we need to maintain the fields.  "We'll be lucky to even get half a season in, so our revenue is going to be well and truly down, because the players don't want to pay for a full season if they are only going to get half. "It's not just a matter of just opening up the gates and we go forward. We've got to implement our COVID safety plan, which is going to take a lot of work and a lot of extra money, as well with sanitising, disinfecting, cleaning." Clubs Queensland, the industry association for community clubs, has valued the annual economic contribution of clubs, including RSLs, at $2.2 billion. Acting CEO Dan Nipperess said the biggest concern stemming from coronavirus shutdowns was the ongoing overhead costs. "Clubs have seen between a 90 and a 95 per cent drop in incomes," he said. "You could be looking at 20 to 25 per cent of community clubs not being able to reopen. About half of the 850 clubs in Queensland are sports clubs." The Australian Sports Foundation has begun surveying clubs to gauge the impact of the pandemic. CEO Patrick Walker said initial responses had painted a worrying picture. "We've got clubs telling us they've lost 80 per cent of their sponsorship because the local pub, club or cafe has closed its doors  clubs that have received their membership regos, spent it, and are now faced with having to refund it, and they don't have the money," he said. "Some have told us they'd be out of business within three months without funding. "The big issue is, we think, when members do get back to competition and training, a lot of people won't be able to afford sport for them or their kids anymore, and there will be a big decline in participation." Heather McLaren, regional president of Marlin Coast Netball in Far North Queensland, said the financial situation for many clubs in the region was also perilous. "Many parents haven't paid their dues at the moment, which is understandable, and many who have paid will want at least a partial refund due to the season being at best truncated, at worst not happening at all," she said. "We're just holding the money and we'll have to refund it if the season doesn't go ahead." Ms McLaren said fees already paid had gone to the managing body in Brisbane and there was uncertainty about whether that money would ever be returned to clubs  further complicating the financial situation. "The fees that we pay to register our players go to the governing body  it covers insurance  and there will have to be some consultation with that state body, and whether we get that money back will be in the lap of the gods, I think," she said. Gladstone Rugby League chairman Richard Duff said the league would survive the pandemic, but not without challenges. "They're all going to survive  the Gladstone council has been proactive having meetings with all sporting groups, and the [Queensland Rugby League] are developing plans to help clubs out of this," he said. "It is going to cost more when we emerge from this, disinfecting the rooms, hand sanitiser, only so many people at games  all of us rely on people coming to junior and senior sport and buying food from the kiosk  so how we are going to generate revenue is going to be the question." Industry bodies have intensified their pleas for government assistance. Australian Sports Foundation CEO Patrick Walker said the body had also been rallying for independent support. "Traditional forms of fundraising have stopped. No sausage sizzles, no club events and dinners, can't do a Friday night meat raffle," he said. "They're being hit from every angle and many will go to the wall. "We do need governments, philanthropy and charities to look at how they can help this part of the community through this troublesome period." In Bundaberg, Des Barritt  who had been planning to host the under-15 men's state championship in September, before it was cancelled  said there was some optimism on the horizon. "Hockey Queensland is hoping to allocate those same championships to the same places again next year, so the areas can hang their hat on having a championship next year and we'll hopefully get some revenue out of that," he said. Queensland's Sports Minister Mick De Brenni has been contacted for comment. 
Family sues cruise company arguing 'they didn't pay enough attention' to 27yo son who died from COVID-19
Photos of 27-year-old Pujiyoko show a young man in his prime, who loved to travel, loved adventure and loved life. When he left his impoverished parents in central Java, to work as a crew member on Royal Caribbean's Symphony of the Seas, Pujiyoko was fit, healthy and excited about a job that would take him around the world. "He loved working on that ship," his father, Isanto, said. "A friend told him about the job, and he told us he wanted to go, so I gave him my permission. "It's what he wanted to do. He was the breadwinner for the family." Pujiyoko worked in housekeeping on the cruise liner, which Royal Caribbean promotes as the largest passenger ship in the world by gross tonnage, and one that offers guests "unforgettable experiences for day and night". But while Pujiyoko's last days on board Symphony of the Seas were unforgettable, it was in the worst possible way. On March 23, roughly a week after the last passengers had disembarked in Miami, he fell ill with symptoms of the coronavirus. According to a wrongful death case filed in Miami's circuit court, he presented to the ship's medical facility every day for a week, with worsening symptoms. Fever and body aches developed into severe pneumonia. By March 28 he was put on oxygen. The following day, still on board, he was diagnosed with COVID-19. But it was only on the evening of March 30 that he was finally taken ashore on a lifeboat and then to hospital, where he was put on a ventilator. Less than two weeks later, he died with a "severe anoxic brain injury". Pujiyoko's parents are now suing Royal Caribbean, alleging their son wasn't tested for COVID-19 for a full six days and should have been taken to shore much earlier. "They didn't tend to him fast enough," his father said. "They didn't pay enough attention to him. "Had the company taken him to hospital sooner, he could have survived." His mother, Sukarni, sobbed as she looked at photos of her son on board the cruise ship, smiling alongside his crewmates in happier times. "His plan was to work so he could make us happy," she said. "He told me [he] would send me on the hajj [to Mecca] as a pilgrim, because we are so poor." Royal Caribbean refused to respond to the ABC's request for an interview, saying "we do not comment on pending litigation". The Indonesian family's US-based lawyer Michael Winkleman says not only did the company neglect Pujiyoko, but it did nothing to protect other crew members, even after passengers had disembarked and the fear of the coronavirus on cruise ships was already widespread. The lawsuit alleges that crew members were even "encouraged to attend parties, shows, events and activities that took place aboard the ship" in the two weeks after passengers had disembarked. They required crew to be in close proximity and crowded spaces, but without any protection against COVID-19. "The [US] Centers for Disease Control (CDC) shut down all cruising on March 13," Mr Winkleman said. "And yet even after that it was as though there was nothing going on for the crew members, nothing being done to protect them. No social distancing, no quarantine, no masks." Mr Winkleman says they even had a party on St Patrick's Day where there were probably "hundreds, if not even a thousand crew members". "Again, no masks, no nothing, no precautions taken to protect the crew," he said. The lawsuit states that at least one passenger on Symphony of the Seas had coronavirus symptoms on March 7, a week before passengers disembarked. All further voyages were cancelled once the CDC was notified of positive cases among passengers. But Royal Caribbean "failed to follow even the most basic safety precautions," such as quarantining crew members on its ships, providing them with masks, or requiring them to observe social distancing, the lawsuit says. Pujiyoko was one of at least five Indonesians to die from COVID-19 on cruise liners, and one of two who died on Royal Caribbean ships. A Balinese man, I Putu Sugiartha, died on one of Royal Caribbean's other ships, the Oasis of the Seas, on April 18, more than a month after he boarded the ship. The ABC has been told his family settled out of court with the shipping company. More than 100 other crew members on Oasis of the Seas tested positive for COVID-19 while on board, the lawsuit alleges. A Filipino crewman, Dexter Joyosa, also died. There are also concerns for those crew members still stranded on cruise ships. Reports have emerged of apparent suicides and protests by crew members who are still stuck on board, unable to leave. While cruise ship companies have been negotiating for weeks with governments to offload passengers around the world, tens of thousands of crew members remain on ships. "Mental health is a huge issue on those ships," Mr Winkleman said. "You have crew members now, going on plus two months they've been trapped on these ships, away from their families, the vast majority of them not being paid. "Half the time they're quarantined in a tiny little cabin, and these are not the passenger cabins, that are much more spacious, these are tiny little cabins." One crew member on the Regal Princess  a Ukrainian woman  threw herself overboard in the Netherlands on May 9. Rotterdam police have ruled the death a suicide. Another crew member  a Polish man  apparently threw himself off an upper deck of the Jewel of the Seas, another Royal Caribbean ship, in early May, although his body has not been found. Crew members on a separate Royal Caribbean ship, the Majesty of the Seas, last week staged a hunger strike begging to go home. A banner posted on board read: "How Many More Suicides are Needed?" Earlier this month, Manila Bay in the Philippines became the world's biggest "parking lot" for cruise ships, with thousands of crew still on board. More ships were expected to join. But shipping companies argue that flight bans and lockdowns have made it impossible to repatriate all their crew. In an April 17 note titled Crew Repatriation Weekly Update, Royal Caribbean wrote that the CDC had banned all flights for crew repatriation. The CDC, however, says it is allowing crew members on ships in US waters to disembark and return home if cruise lines "submit a signed attestation stating that they have complied with requirements to safely disembark their crew members". Royal Caribbean says repatriation plans are now underway. "So far, we have successfully repatriated over 16,000 crew members, and we are working with governments and health authorities around the world on our plans," the company told the BBC. 
Government's COVID Commission manufacturing plan calls for huge public gas subsidies
State bans on coal seam gas development would be scrapped and the Federal Government would underwrite gas prices and massively subsidise costs and investment for gas companies, under confidential plans for a "gas-led manufacturing recovery" post-COVID-19. The draft plans, obtained by the ABC, call for the scrapping of "green and red tape" on gas development, including a relaxation of Australian standards for equipment used in gas infrastructure and a loosening of environmental regulations and approval processes. They are set out in an interim report from the manufacturing taskforce of the National COVID Coordination Commission (NCCC). The NCCC is a hand-picked team of business leaders and former bureaucrats set up by the Prime Minister's Office to shape the economic recovery from the virus and lockdown, and includes several members with strong links to the gas sector. The manufacturing taskforce includes business representatives as well as union leaders from that sector. Its draft report advocates "underwriting new [gas] supply with government balance sheets" to allow gas producers "to invest with confidence and new pipelines to be built to get the gas to markets". The taskforce says the Government should be "taking a non-operating equity position, minority share, or underwriting position" in gas projects and "provide support, such as low-cost capital, to existing small and mid-cap market participants". It also wants mechanisms to put a government-guaranteed floor under gas prices, so companies can borrow against that guaranteed price. And the NCCC wants massive government spending to underwrite a network of new pipelines linking gas projects in the north-west of Western Australia to the east coast. New gas ventures that meet state-based environmental standards would be exempt from the need to gain federal environmental approvals under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Act if the recommendations of the commission and taskforce are adopted. Concerns about the environment and the impact on agriculture and groundwater have led to the shelving of coal seam gas developments in NSW and Victoria. But the NCCC is urging governments to "lift the moratorium in NSW and the remaining moratoria in Victoria", "initiate a rapid 'red & green tape' reduction" and "establish a global best practice gas development regulatory framework in the Northern Territory  to unlock new supply for the east coast." The contents of the plan highlight potential conflicts of interest for businesspeople involved in the NCCC and its manufacturing taskforce. West Australian businessman Nev Power, who chairs the NCCC, is a director and shareholder of WA-based Strike Energy, which aspires to be "the lowest cost onshore gas producer in Australia" and would potentially benefit from government investment subsidies and the underwriting of gas pipelines. The NCCC report obtained by the ABC advocates "accelerated developments for highly prospective opportunities" including the Perth Basin, which is Strike Energy's main exploration area. The commission's special advisor on manufacturing renewal, former Dow Chemical global chairman and CEO Andrew Liveris, is deputy chairman of the world's biggest oil and gas consultancy and engineering firm, Worley, and is also a director of Saudi Aramco, the world's biggest oil and gas company, which has ambitions to invest in Australia. Facilitating foreign direct investment in the gas industry is one of the report's recommendations. A Senate committee which examined the taskforce last week was told that members of the NCCC were required to sign a conflict of interest declaration but, as a "special advisor" to the commission, Mr Liveris was not. The Federal Government's National COVID Coordination Commission has a lot of gas industry players involved, and it appears to be showing in its policy recommendations. Speaking at the committee hearings, the CEO of the NCCC, former Productivity Commission chairman Peter Harris, said the commission had established "what you might consider to the normal declaration process" for conflicts of interest at the start of each of its meetings. He said that as NCCC chairman, Nev Power had "taken it upon himself to advise commissioners that  should they encounter something which involves commercially sensitive information which could create a perception that they are being put in an advantageous position, they should draw that matter to his attention or, in his absence, to my attention." Mr Harris added that the commission would "construct an arrangement by which they can either continue their involvement in this or remove themselves from involvement  and another commissioner will take over." In a statement to the ABC from the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, on behalf of the NCCC, the commission reiterated that it follows "best-practice arrangements for managing the integrity of its advice". "That includes recusal from discussions where there may be a conflict of interest and written declarations to the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet recording their interests and those of their family members," the statement noted. "The commission has also put in place additional processes to manage potential conflicts of interest, such as commencing each meeting of the NCCC with a declaration of any relevant conflicts." When asked by The Business host Elysse Morgan in an interview earlier this month whether his involvement with Strike Energy presented any conflict of interest given his role at the commission, Mr Power said he supported all types of energy. He described Strike as "an emerging player in the gas market in Western Australia". When asked again about the potential for conflicts in a recent interview with the Financial Review, Mr Power said "we are very transparent about our interests" and the commission had "processes" to address that issue. "We are there to provide business advice and we are upfront about that." Mr Power said, ultimately, the government would make decisions, not the commission. In the vision of the taskforce, gas development goes hand-in-hand with development of energy-intensive manufacturing industries, including chemicals and "mineral tech". Renewables are not to blame for soaring electricity costs: gas is the main culprit, writes Ian Verrender. But the NCCC's emphasis on a "gas-led manufacturing recovery" and call for government subsidies and relaxing of environmental controls has drawn severe criticism from analysts and advocacy groups who support a shift away from fossil fuels to renewable energy. "It's a blueprint for the gas industry, it's not a manufacturing blueprint, it's pathetic," said Tim Buckley, director of energy research at the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis, who spent 30 years in senior roles in investment banking. "They say we need to correct the 'market failures' of our current energy supply to reduce electricity costs and 'break the investment logjam'. "As far as I am concerned, spending 80 billion dollars in east coast gas markets in the last eight years is an exact opposite of an investment logjam." Mr Buckley said there was a huge irony that the gas industry's massive, unprofitable investment in three giant gas export terminals off the coast of Queensland was responsible for a massive rise in gas prices for Australian industry. "The very industry that has created a massive inflationary pressure that has undermined our manufacturing base is now saying the gas industry should get massive subsidies," he said. "Their answer to the gas industry absolutely decimating the manufacturing industry is for tax payers to underwrite a rescue of the gas industry. "They say they want 'a free and open trading regime', yet they are calling for taxpayers to provide massive capital subsidies and to underwrite gas prices." On the reckoning of the NCCC, Australian gas prices have tripled since 2014, when the export terminals were built. WA has cheaper gas prices than the east coast because the State Government made companies set some gas aside for local use. While there is mention of gas reservation policy  which would see a set amount of gas set aside for domestic use, rather than export  it does not feature in the report's key points, which focus on public investment, increased production and pipelines. Dan Gocher, director of climate and environment at the Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility, accuses the industry of using COVID-19 as cover. "This is predatory behaviour from the gas industry," he argued. "They are opportunistically using the COVID-19 crisis to push through uneconomic, polluting plans dependent on taxpayer subsidies, which until the pandemic hit were beyond their wildest dreams." While aspects of the draft plan have widespread support within the gas sector  such as reduced environmental regulation and more streamlined approval processes  the construction of an east-west pipeline has received widespread criticism within the industry for its prohibitive cost. The interim report has an extensive list of people the NCCC's manufacturing taskforce spoke to in devising its plan. It includes a large number of executives from the energy and resources industry including gas giants Santos and Inpex, oil and gas explorers Pangea Resources and Blue Energy, chemical giants Dow, Orica, and IncitecPivot, oil and gas engineering consultancy Worley, and mining giants BHP and Rio Tinto. Only one firm from the clean energy sector was included in the list, EPC Technologies, and it was the company's senior gas and hydrogen expert who was consulted. However, the commission noted that the Manufacturing Taskforce was only one of its working groups. "The commission has liaised with well over a thousand stakeholders representing a broad cross-section of the business community including individuals and organisations with expertise in renewable energy," it said in a statement. "The commission has established a number of working groups to explore issues and bring forward ideas for further consideration, of which the manufacturing working group is one." 
Russia says many coronavirus patients died of other causes, putting its official COVID-19 death toll in doubt
Debate has surged in Russia around to what degree coronavirus must exacerbate existing conditions for it to be recorded as the cause of death, and it could be the reason why Russia's death rate is so low. Before she died in a Moscow hospital earlier this month, Liubov Kashaeva, 74, twice tested positive for COVID-19 but her death was not attributed to the virus, however. It was put down to the cancer she had been suffering from. "The medical death certificate ... said she died of a malignant tumour. Coronavirus was not mentioned anywhere," Kashaeva's daughter-in-law, Daria Kornilova said. Ms Kashaeva is one of thousands of Russians infected with COVID-19 whose deaths have been put down to other causes. Russia has registered the second highest number of infections globally wi9th over 308,000 global cases, and 2,972 deaths.  Those figures produce a death rate of 1.88 per 100,000 Russians, according to figures compiled by the Johns Hopkins University. The equivalent figure for the US, who have the most cases in the world, is 27.61 per 100,000 Americans, and 52.45 in Britain.  Comparatively in Australia, where 100 people have died from the virus the rate is 0.40. "We now know all the characteristics of COVID-19 sufficiently well," said pathologist Oleg Zairatyants, author of the Moscow Health Department guidelines for coronavirus autopsies. "The result (of the analysis) is objective and pronounced by the commission ... Unfortunately people are dying, but their cause of death is clear to us," he said, when asked about deaths not being attributed to COVID-19 even when someone had tested positive for the virus. However, the relatives of several deceased patients dispute that their loved ones would have died when they did had it not been for the virus. Ms Kashaeva had been diagnosed with late-stage bowel cancer in January but she was due to start chemotherapy and the family expected to have more time with her. On May 3, Ms Kashaeva was taken into hospital after feeling weak. Scans showed she'd developed pneumonia in both lungs, a common symptom of coronavirus infection, and two tests were taken, coming back positive.  Just 5 days later on May 8, Ms Kashaeva died. "Coronavirus killed our grandmother of course and we're grieving," Ms Kornilova said. "If it wasn't for coronavirus, with chemotherapy she would have held out for some time." Moscow, the epicentre of Russia's coronavirus outbreak, reports that over 60 per cent of deaths of people infected with coronavirus in April did not enter its death toll tally, and were put down to other causes. The Moscow Health Department said the way Russia counted coronavirus deaths was more accurate than other countries and cited the benefits of a nationwide testing programme which has seen over 7 million tests done. Ms Kornilova said she felt that the decision on how to classify her mother-in-law's death "depended on the party line. "And as far as I know, right now, the party line says ... that Russia's death toll must be as low as possible." The Kremlin said Russia's use of autopsies in determining cause of death set it apart from many western countries, who unlike Russia don't rely on a post-mortem analysis. "We're not hiding anything. Cause of death is determined by an autopsy. It's specifically the autopsy that allows us to produce an accurate judgment, on the basis of which cause of death can differ," said Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov Alexey Erlikh, head of intensive cardiac care at Moscow's Hospital 29, which has been designated to treat coronavirus, is one of many doctors that says the distinction is arbitrary. "Simply put, no one ever dies 'from' a virus. People die from complications resulting from a virus," Dr Erlikh said. "But they also die from the complications of a chronic illness that are caused by the virus. Some people believe that such deaths shouldn't be counted in the coronavirus death toll. I believe they should. "On this point I am strongly at odds with some of my colleagues, those top doctors whose pictures are hanging up all over the city." In Britain, all deaths of people who tested positive for coronavirus, and those with a negative test where coronavirus is suspected, enter the death toll, according to Dr Carl Heneghan. "We're not in a position to distinguish dying 'from' or 'with' coronavirus," he said. Speaking anonymously, a Moscow-based pathologist said that making a clear distinction between the two was virtually impossible. The World Health Organization (WHO) says it sees no problems with Russia's approach. "There is no conscious undercounting," Melita Vujnovic, the WHO's chief representative in Russia, told Russian state TV.  "It is possible that some recounts may be done or something else ... but right now I don't see anything serious." ABC/ Reuters 
Australia started a fight with China over an investigation into COVID-19  did it go too hard?
It was the interview that sent hares running around the world. One month ago, Foreign Minister Marise Payne told the ABC's Insiders program that Australia would push for an independent international inquiry into the outbreak of COVID-19. Prime Minister Scott Morrison went a step further two days later, suggesting that the World Health Organization (WHO) needed tough new "weapons inspector" powers to investigate what caused the outbreak. It was political dynamite. Australia's friends and allies in Europe, still desperately scrambling to contain the pandemic at home, were startled. Why hadn't Australia got on the phone before wading into such fraught territory? The Chinese Government was  predictably  incensed, accusing Australia of launching a political attack on China and "pandering" to the United States. The furore intensified after China's ambassador hit back by warning of a consumer boycott, and it was supercharged by China's decision to hit Australian exports of beef, and lock in tariffs on barley. But one month after that first interview, the Morrison Government has now emerged battered and bloodied from the diplomatic fray, clutching a piece of paper, and declaring victory. Last night the World Health Assembly (WHA) passed a European Union motion calling for a "comprehensive, independent and impartial" investigation into how the pandemic started and the international health response. A record 137 countries  including both Australia and China  ended up co-sponsoring the motion, giving it overwhelming international endorsement. So was this a blazing victory for Australia and principled diplomacy? Or did the Federal Government blunder into a pointless stoush with China by going too hard, too early? One source in the Federal Government argues the decision to go both hard and early was quite deliberate. While the Government would have liked to gather allies before going public, its options looked threadbare. Australia would traditionally turn first to the US for help building an international coalition, but Australian officials were deeply anxious about the inflammatory rhetoric being used by both Donald Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo on the pandemic. The chances of a US-led inquiry getting broad international support looked perishingly small. The Government also worried that European countries  still reeling after being smashed by the first wave of coronavirus infections  would be too distracted to champion the principle of an inquiry. So, the United States was too keen, and Europe was not keen enough. The Coalition reasoned that if it wanted to kickstart an international debate about an inquiry, then it also wanted to frame the debate on its terms. In the days and weeks after that Insiders interview, both Mr Morrison and Senator Payne hit the phones to rally support. The Foreign Minister logged calls with almost 40 of her counterparts as well as the UN Secretary-General and the WHO's Director-General. The deadline was tight. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade quickly identified the best place to push the inquiry forward  a meeting of the World Health Assembly in Geneva, which was due in only four weeks.   But the initial response was cautious. In a phone call with Mr Morrison, French President Emmanuel Macron backed the broad principle of an inquiry. But he also made it clear that France was deeply preoccupied with containing the virus and did not want to see the international community fractured by an acrimonious debate over the outbreak. The Federal Government quickly realised that it would need to make concessions if it wanted to gather a substantial coalition of countries to push for an investigation. The big compromise came first. The Coalition holds deep-seated concerns about the WHO leadership, and worries it has drawn too close to China. Senator Payne said on Insiders the organisation should have nothing to do with the inquiry, saying that struck her as a "somewhat poacher and gamekeeper" arrangement. But with the clock ticking  and agreement elusive on which other body could possibly take the lead on an inquiry  Australia agreed to narrow its ambition. On May 7 Australia swung its support behind a European Union draft motion which called only for an "evaluation" of the outbreak by some of the WHO's independent review committees. The review committee was already a known quantity, as it had been set up in the wake of the Ebola outbreak.  Multilateral organisations like precedents, and Australian officials thought there was a good chance that other nations would be comfortable with it taking the reins of an investigation.  At this stage the list of co-sponsors was very small, including only the EU, Argentina and some minnows like Monaco and North Macedonia. Still, ducking behind the EU motion not only instantly gave Australia a bloc of allies, it also took some of the heat out of the delicate negotiations on the motion  particularly when it came to talks with Chinese officials. The Morrison Government seems to be betting that all it needs to do is hold its nerve and hold the line when it comes to China's trade threats. The Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister also toned down their rhetoric. Coalition ministers were unyielding in their call for an independent inquiry, but there was much less talk about giving the WHO "weapons inspector" powers. Meanwhile, Australian diplomats poured all their energy into trying to beef up the language in the EU motion to ensure it could provide a workable framework for a proper inquiry. The words "impartial" and "independent" were injected into the text. Simultaneously, officials worked to reassure European countries that the push for an inquiry wouldn't distract from the immediate crisis of tackling the outbreak. As the WHA meeting approached, the momentum behind the inquiry push quickly grew. Two days before the meeting, 62 countries  including major powers like India, South Korea, Japan and Indonesia  had signed on as co-sponsors. That number had swelled to more than 100 by Sunday night, before China finally climbed on board just before the vote on Tuesday. The motion passed by the WHA is a compromise. There is no specific mention of China. There are no new powers for the WHO. And the most likely review mechanism is an independent committee which sits within  not outside  the organisation. The Chinese Embassy in Canberra has been scathing. It says China was always willing to agree to a "scientific investigation" and Australia's initial call for an independent inquiry outside the WHO has floundered. Earlier this week it escalated the dispute further, issuing an extraordinarily contemptuous statement. "To claim the World Health Assembly's resolution is a vindication of Australia's call is nothing but a joke," it read. But Senator Payne argues Australia's key demands have been met, and the Coalition is celebrating the result at the WHA as a clear diplomatic victory. While the committee likely to take on the probe is a WHO body, Senator Payne maintains its expert members are not beholden to the organisation's leadership. "They are from the international system with very broad experience in a range of public health areas," she said. "They serve in their personal capacity, they are not, if you like, part of the WHO structure." The Government also points out that the motion specifically permits "scientific and collaborative field missions" to work out exactly how the disease made the jump from animals to humans.  Queensland senator Matt Canavan called the success of the motion a "massive vindication" for the Government, while Health Minister Greg Hunt said Australia "helped provide the impetus and the resolve" needed at the WHA to push the inquiry motion over the line. Not all foreign policy watchers are so convinced. Associate Professor Matthew Sussex from the Australian National University said Australia's attempt to get out in front of the issue "needlessly annoyed the EU, and further problematised our relationship with China". "There's a good argument to say that we stood to gain more by waiting," he said. "The EU would have gone to the WHA anyway, and Canberra could have played a middle role to mediate whatever hard line Washington had come up with, building consensus and a coalition in the process. "It was an own goal, and hardly a triumph for middle-power diplomacy." Other experts are quicker to give the Federal Government credit. The head of the National Security College, Rory Medcalf, said the Government's call for an independent inquiry was both principled and courageous. Professor Medcalf said the Government got off to a "somewhat ragged start" on its negotiations with other countries, but it "refined and evolved its approach pretty rapidly". "The diplomatic courage and the forthrightness of Australia really taking a stand on this issue will be borne out in the historical record," he said. 
Global coronavirus cases pass 5 million as situation worsens in Brazil, Russia, India
There are now more than 5 million cases of coronavirus around the world, with a record 106,000 new cases recorded in the last 24 hours, the World Health Organization says. 1 million new cases are now being reported every two weeks WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said two-thirds of the new cases came from just four countries  the US, Russia, Brazil and India. "We still have a long way to go in this pandemic," Dr Tedros said. "We are very concerned about rising cases in low and middle-income countries." Latin America overtook the US and Europe in the past week to report the largest portion of new daily cases globally. It represents a new phase in the spread of the virus, which initially peaked in China in February before large-scale outbreaks in Europe and the United States. Latin America accounted for around a third of the 91,000 cases reported earlier this week. Europe and the United States each accounted for just over 20 per cent. A large number of those new cases came from Brazil, which recently surpassed Germany, France and the United Kingdom to become the third-largest outbreak in the world, behind the United States and Russia. Cases in Brazil are now rising at a daily pace second only to the US. The WHO has come under fire from US President Donald Trump, who accuses it of having mishandled the outbreak and favouring China. This week Mr Trump threatened to withdraw from the WHO and permanently withhold US funding. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Dr Tedros acknowledged having received a letter from Mr Trump, but declined to comment further. The WHO has announced a review into the response to the pandemic. "WHO calls for accountability more than anyone," Dr Tedros said of the review, while declining to give a timeline for it starting. "It has to be done and when it's done it has to be a comprehensive one." The first 41 cases of coronavirus were confirmed in Wuhan, China, on January 10 and it took the world until April 1 to reach its first million cases. Since then, about 1 million new cases have been reported every two weeks, according to a Reuters tally. At more than 5 million cases, the virus has infected more people in under six months than the annual total of severe flu cases, which the World Health Organization estimates is around 3 million to 5 million globally. The pandemic has officially claimed more than 326,000 lives, though the true number is thought to be higher as testing is still limited and many countries do not include fatalities outside hospitals. Over half of the total deaths have been recorded in Europe. Despite the continued increase in cases, many countries are opening schools and workplaces following weeks of lockdown that have stemmed the spread. Financial markets have also been boosted slightly by promising early results from the first US vaccine trial in humans. ABC/wires 
UK beaches packed on year's hottest day after easing of coronavirus measures
Thousands of people descended on British beaches on the UK's hottest day of the year, after the easing of coronavirus restrictions across England. With the official start of summer still a month away, the temperature reached 28.2 degrees Celsius at Santon Downham in Suffolk on Wednesday, with 27.8C recorded at London's Heathrow Airport. Popular seaside destinations, including Brighton, Bournemouth and Southend-on-Sea reported large midweek crowds. Under new rules in England, people are allowed to travel to leisure spots and meet one person outside their household, but are required to follow social-distancing guidelines. Tougher quarantine measures remain in place elsewhere in the UK, with the leaders of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland all sticking to the "Stay at Home" messaging. Southend Independent councillor Martin Terry said most people were observing social distancing and the council was doing everything it could to keep people safe. But some beachgoers on social media complained that not everyone was adhering to the recommendation to stay 6 feet (1.8 metres) apart. There were also long queues for seaside restaurants, including takeaway outlets serving traditional British fish and chips. Lockdown measures were eased in England last week following almost two months of restrictions. The UK's death toll from COVID-19 rose by 363 on Wednesday to 35,704, the highest tally in Europe and second in the world behind only the US. As many of its citizens visited beauty spots, the British Government pledged to have a "test, track and trace" program for coronavirus in place by June 1. It also sought to bring as many MPs as possible back to parliament by June 2. The dual announcements formed part of a strategy to persuade the UK that it is safe to move on to the next stage of easing the COVID-19 lockdown, with the reopening of schools for some younger children at the start of June.  Prime Minister Boris Johnson, who returned to work after a serious battle with COVID-19 last month, has been criticised for his Government's failure to have a national tracing system in place over the past 10 weeks.  "We're making fast progress in testing and tracing and I have great confidence that by June 1 we will have a system that will enable us, that will help us very greatly to defeat this disease," Mr Johnson said. British police issued more than 14,000 fines to lockdown flouters in England and Wales between March 27 and May 11, including 906 handed out to Londoners and 862 to repeat offenders. The penalty has now risen from 60 pounds ($111) to 100 pounds ($185). The unseasonably warm weather has seen many people throw caution to the wind as they look to socialise again after spending much of spring indoors. The average top temperature for London in May is 18C. ABC/wires 
Coronavirus impact: Census data shows which Canberra suburbs are most vulnerable to economic effects of COVID-19
Canberra is slowly emerging from the coronavirus pandemic  it has been free of known cases for most of this month. But while social distancing restrictions are easing, the economic consequences of containing the disease are just beginning to be measured. An estimated 8,700 Canberrans lost their jobs last month, the Australian Bureau of Statistics says. It was the largest monthly job loss in the bureau's dataset, which goes back four decades. Similarly, the number of Canberrans who are under-employed (working fewer hours than they want to) almost doubled to more than 22,000  another record increase. We know from the bureau's survey that almost every job lost in the ACT was casual or part-time. But is it also possible to tell which parts of the city will be the worst-affected? In the pandemic's early stages, a tech firm, Seer Data and Analytics, set about answering a similar question for the New South Wales Treasury's data analytics centre. Seer's chief data scientist, Adam Peaston, said the project's goal was to "shine a light on which communities will be suffering economically". This is not the same as finding the most disadvantaged areas, which are already well known. Instead, Seer modelled which areas were most vulnerable to the business restrictions put in place over the past two months. "We're comparing locations which have a high rate of people employed in vulnerable industries and vulnerable occupations within the context of COVID-19," Peaston says. "We then intersect those types of areas with areas where people are already struggling to keep pace with either their rent or mortgage. "This is where you'd expect to have the combination of large numbers of people losing their jobs and being unable to make payments towards their housing." Seer's technique, applied to ACT and Queanbeyan suburbs (excluding those with fewer than 1,000 people), suggests Canberra's fringes will suffer more than the rest of the city. The analysis weights two factors evenly: Four of the five most vulnerable suburbs are in Gungahlin  Casey, Bonner, Ngunnawal and Franklin  while nearby Macgregor is the other. Other areas of concern are the new Molonglo suburbs of Wright and Coombs which, like Gungahlin's fringes, are home to many families with relatively large mortgages. Meanwhile, Queanbeyan, Bruce and the student suburb of Acton have particularly high numbers of workers with at-risk jobs. Unsurprisingly, the least exposed areas in Canberra are the established, diplomatic-belt suburbs of the inner south, such as Yarralumla, Deakin and Forrest. While suburbs can change over time  the census data is now four years old  Peaston said governments and non-profits need to know where to look to find people in need before their lives fall into crisis. "I think these will be the places to watch carefully, to see if people in those areas are facing residual difficulties, even as restrictions ease," he said. "Perhaps businesses haven't been able to keep as many people employed, or give them enough hours. "There may be large numbers of people there who are about to tip over that housing security threshold." Even more so, he added, if a second wave of COVID-19 cases sparks another lockdown, and even greater economic losses. 
Police fire tear gas in Hong Kong as hundreds protest against proposed national security laws
Police in Hong Kong have fired tear gas and used a water cannon and pepper spray to disperse thousands of people protesting against Beijing's plan to directly impose national security laws on the city, the biggest flare-up there since COVID-19 lockdowns began. Protesters took to the shopping district of Causeway Bay on Sunday chanting "Revolution of our time. Liberate Hong Kong" and "Hong Kong Independence, the only way out".  The protest was the first since Beijing proposed national security laws on Thursday and posed a fresh challenge to Chinese President Xi Jinping as authorities struggle to tame public opposition to China's tightening grip over the global financial hub. Hong Kong democracy activists say the national security legislation is evidence of Beijing's encroachment on freedoms guaranteed to Hong Kong under its "one country, two systems" style of governance. The arrangement, which has been in place since the former UK colony's return to Chinese rule in 1997, guarantees the city broad freedoms not seen on the mainland, including a free press and independent judiciary. Police raised blue flags, warning protesters to disperse, before firing multiple rounds of tear gas. They later fired a water cannon at the protesters. At least 120 people were arrested, mostly on charges of unlawful assembly, police said in a Facebook post. They said in a separate post protesters threw bricks and splashed unidentified liquid at officers, injuring at least four members of the police's media liaison team.  They warned that such behaviour was against the law and police would pursue the matter. Earlier in the afternoon, prominent activist Tam Tak-chi was arrested during the protest for what police said was unauthorised assembly.  Mr Tam said he was giving a "health talk" and was exempt from social-distancing measures that prohibit gatherings of more than eight people. Sunday's rallies are a continuation of a months-long pro-democracy movement that began last year and has at times descended into violence between police and protesters. The new law, expected to be passed on May 28, would bypass the city's legislature and allow the Hong Kong Government to set up mainland agencies in the city. There are fears it will allow Chinese agents to arbitrarily arrest people for activities deemed to be pro-democracy. Police conducted stop-and-search operations in Causeway Bay and warned people not to violate a ban on gatherings of more than eight people, imposed to curb the spread of coronavirus. "Now is the beginning of the end, and time is really running out in Hong Kong, and that's the reason for us  even under the outbreak of COVID-19  we still need to gather our strength to protest," democracy activist Joshua Wong said. Authorities in Beijing and Hong Kong have said the proposed laws are necessary and will not harm the city's autonomy. "These radical claims and illegal violence are extremely worrying," Chief Secretary Matthew Cheung said in a blog post. "We must face [this issue] squarely. If the situation is not effectively contained, it may be elevated to the level of endangering national security." Hong Kong was handed back to China with no framework for what would happen after the year 2047, leaving the city to carve an identity out of two ideologically opposed empires. Secretary for Security John Lee said the laws would help maintain Hong Kong's long-term prosperity. A small group of democracy activists protested outside Beijing's Liaison Office, chanting, "National security law is destroying two systems". A water-cannon truck was parked outside, while dozens of riot police were deployed across the city. Avery Ng of the League for Social Democrats pasted protest signs on a plaque outside the Liaison Office, despite warnings from police. He described it as an "evil law" and appealed to Hong Kong people to come out and protest against it. "It's a moveable red line. In future they can arrest, lock up and silence anyone they want in the name of national security. We have to resist it," he said. Some local commentators have described the proposal as "a nuclear option" that is part of Mr Xi's high-stakes power play. A backlash intensified on Saturday as nearly 200 political figures from around the world said in a statement the proposed laws were a "comprehensive assault on the city's autonomy, rule of law and fundamental freedoms". China dismissed other countries' complaints as "meddling" and rejected concerns the proposed laws would harm foreign investors. Wires 
JobKeeper explained: What your boss can and cannot ask you to do
It's been less than two months since the Federal Government announced its $70 billion JobKeeper package for Australians who have lost their jobs or been forced out of work due to the coronavirus pandemic.  Eligible employees began to receive the payment from the start of this month, backdated to 30 March when the scheme was first announced. However some businesses have come under fire for asking their employees to work so they can "earn" the payment. That's raised questions about whether employers can make their employees work or perform other duties to receive the JobKeeper payment  so the ABC has spoken to the experts to find out.  JobKeeper is part of the Federal Government's $320 billion economic support package to subsidise wages for businesses impacted by the coronavirus pandemic. It was designed to help employers pay their employees during the coronavirus pandemic for up to six months, with businesses claiming a reimbursement from the Federal Government through the Australian Tax Office. Eligible businesses must first apply for the scheme before nominating their employees to receive a fortnightly payment of $1,500 before tax. The Federal Government estimates that some 3.5 million Australian workers will benefit from the payment, and more than 910,000 businesses have applied for the scheme to date. "Technically under JobKeeper, it's not lawful to make an employee earn the JobKeeper allowance," said Zana Bytheway, executive director at employment legal rights service JobWatch. Ms Bytheway said JobKeeper was meant to help businesses which had seen a downturn in business because of the coronavirus pay their employees. "Say you work two days a week and have been stood down as a consequence of coronavirus, therefore you are home for that period of time and you are an eligible employee to receive a JobKeeper allowance," Ms Bytheway explained. "The employer is required to pass on the full benefit of that $1,500 to you even though your income would have been $1,000 per fortnight." But JobKeeper isn't only available for those who are now suddenly without work due to coronavirus. "You're also able to receive JobKeeper if you are working and you have got the capacity to work," Ms Bytheway added. It depends on the type of change. Your hours can be reduced temporarily as part of the "JobKeeper enabling stand down directions" made by your employer, which is part of the Fair Work Act and allows employers to reduce the number of days or hours an employee usually works. The Fair Work Ombudsman said an eligible employee could be given the direction if they were unable to be usefully employed for their normal working days or hours due to the pandemic or measures taken by the Government to slow the spread of the virus. But the direction does not allow for employers to increase the number of hours their employees work.  "They [employees] can't be forced or coerced to work more than they usually would," Jannette Armstrong, Tasmanian secretary of the United Workers Union, said. Employers also can't ask their employees to work additional hours to mimic the number they would have to work to typically receive $1,500 a fortnight. The Fair Work Ombudsman says that's "not likely to be reasonable". But that is not to say working more hours is out of the question while receiving JobKeeper payments.  Employers can ask employees if they want to work more hours, but Fair Work says any increase "needs to be reasonable". Whether employees choose to work the extra hours offered though is up to the employee  and they can refuse if it isn't reasonable. "There's a whole host of reasons why it might not be reasonable or realistic for a person's hours to be increased," Ms Armstrong said. "A lot of people are in these new situations, where they're having to homeschool and having to care for other people who might have been at school or childcare and now can't because of the shutdown and isolation." Similar to the hours you work, the duties you perform at work can also be changed.  Ms Bytheway said in order for that to happen, certain conditions needed to be met. "You have to consider safety, you have to consider the skills and competencies of the person in order to do that and, of course, if there are licences and qualifications involved, that is also a consideration," she said. Fair Work said the direction also had to be reasonable, otherwise it did not apply to the employee. The duties must also be related to the operation of the business they work at, meaning odd jobs likely won't fit the bill. Some duties can also attract a higher base pay rate, depending on an award or enterprise agreement. If that's the case, Fair Work says the employee needs to be paid at the higher rate.  By the same token, employers cannot reduce an employee's rate if the duties they're now performing typically attract a lower base pay rate than what the employee usually receives. Employers are also unable to change the duties of employees immediately. Fair Work said employers needed to notify employees about any change in usual duties at least three days before the change was made through the JobKeeper enabling direction, consult with employees about the direction and keep a written record of it, and give the employee the agreed direction in writing. Ms Armstrong encouraged employees to raise the matter with their employer directly if they were comfortable about that. "But I would absolutely recommend that they get some support and some advice about their rights and entitlements before doing so," she said. Ms Bytheway said it could also potentially be a JobKeeper dispute, and would be considered as a matter for the Fair Work Commission.  "They can then arbitrate, mediate or conciliate the disputes and essentially can make an order in relation to the direction," she said. A Fair Work spokesperson said anyone with an urgent enquiry about their workplace obligations could contact the Fair Work Ombudsman on 13 13 94 or through the website. 
Ambassador intervenes after Mike Pompeo warns US could 'disconnect' from Australia over Victoria's Belt and Road deal
The US ambassador to Australia has played down a suggestion from his Secretary of State Mike Pompeo that his nation could "simply disconnect" from Australia if Victoria's trade deal with Beijing threatened its telecommunication security. On Sunday morning, Mr Pompeo said while he was not aware of the detail of Victoria's agreement, it could impact his nation's Five Eyes intelligence-sharing partnership with Australia. In an interview with Sky News, Mr Pompeo warned the Belt and Road agreement with the Andrews Government increased the Chinese communist regime's ability to do "harm". China's trillion-dollar Belt and Road initiative (BRI) is a global infrastructure push aiming to recreate the glory days of China's ancient Silk Road trade routes. The highly controversial scheme has been panned by many Western democracies, including Australia. More and more countries are choosing to ink agreements with China on its trillion-dollar Belt and Road initiative, but what are countries actually agreeing to when they sign on? But Victoria has gone it alone on signing up to the infrastructure initiative, with Premier Daniel Andrews inking a Memorandum of Understanding with China in 2018 and committing to deepen the state's involvement in 2019. The non-legally-binding agreement allows Victorian infrastructure experts to get access to the hundreds of billions of dollars of projects slated for the Belt and Road. It also encourages Chinese infrastructure firms to establish a presence in Victoria and to bid for major infrastructure projects. "I don't know the nature of those projects precisely," Mr Pompeo told Sky News today. "To the extent they have an adverse impact on our ability to protect telecommunications from our private citizens, or security networks for our defence and intelligence communities  we simply disconnect, we will simply separate. "We are going to preserve trust in networks for important information. We hope our friends and allies, especially our Five Eyes partners like Australia, do the same." Mr Pompeo said the scheme broadly came at "some cost" to those who signed on. "Every nation has its own sovereign right to make decisions for itself, and I suppose Victoria has some rights that it can undertake but every citizen of Australia should know that every one of those Belt and Road projects needs to be looked at incredibly closely," he said. On Sunday afternoon, the US ambassador, Arthur Culvahouse Jr, released a statement in response to coverage of Mr Pompeo's interview, saying he wanted to "set the record straight". He said after Mr Pompeo was asked about a "very remote hypothetical", he had carefully noted that he was not across the detail of Victoria's Belt and Road agreement. "The United States has absolute confidence in the Australian Government's ability to protect the security of its telecommunications networks and those of its Five Eyes partners," Mr Culvahouse said. "We have made no secret of our concerns about 5G, and we commend Australia for its leadership on the issue. "We are not aware that Victoria has engaged in any concrete projects under BRI, let alone projects impinging on telecommunications networks, which we understand are a federal matter.  "If there were telecommunications initiatives that we thought put the integrity of our networks at risk, of course we would have to take a close look at that, as the Secretary suggested." The State Opposition has criticised the Andrews Government for continuing with the infrastructure deal despite increased tensions between Canberra and Beijing. China has reacted angrily to the Federal Government's push for an independent inquiry into the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic. Beijing has recently imposed tariffs of 80 per cent on Australian barley and put an import ban on four Australian abattoirs, moves which the Morrison Government says are unrelated to the inquiry. But Victorian Treasurer Tim Pallas last week made a connection to the events, saying: "I don't suppose it would come as a surprise to anybody that this was the consequence of the way that the Federal Government had conducted themselves." He earlier told a parliamentary committee the state would "absolutely not" be putting the deal on hold while the inquiry was conducted. When asked about Mr Pompeo's comments at a press conference on Sunday morning, Mr Andrews said while he had not seen the interview, "my position on these matters is very well known". "It's all about Victoria jobs and we'll continue to work at a strong partnership," he said. "Doesn't mean we agree on everything, there are many things we don't agree on. "But what I think all of us here and indeed both parts of our partnership, both Victoria, Australia and China  surely we all have to concede and we all have to recognise that a good, strong partnership is in everyone's interests." A Government spokesperson later said the Belt and Road framework was "about creating opportunities for Victorian businesses and local jobs  opportunities that will be more important than ever as we rebuild from the coronavirus pandemic". "Telecommunications regulation is the responsibility of the Commonwealth Government," the spokesperson continued. "Victoria has not, and will not in the future, agree to telecommunications projects under the BRI." 
NSW records one new case of COVID-19, as beauty salons allowed to reopen
NSW has recorded just one new case of COVID-19, as authorities announced beauty and tanning salons and nail bars will be allowed to reopen from June 1. Gyms will remain closed for now, however. NSW Health Minister Brad Hazzard said it was a "good day" to be able to flag the new openings.  "Of all ofthe requests I've had as HealthMinister in the last three months,this has been the one that I thinkhas topped the barrel," he said.  "It hascertainly been a very earnest effortfrom a lot of people to make sure wecould open [the salons]." Mr Hazzard advised those beauty business would need to have "a COVID-safe plan" before they reopened, and adhere to 1.5-metre social distancing. "Your task is to not only deliver the services that people need and want, but also make sure they are kept safe," he said. Mr Hazzard also said he was keen to get gyms open as soon as possible, but there were numerous safety elements involved.  He said NSW Health was working with the gym industry to "address the range of issues". Mr Hazzard said aspects  including the use of equipment, the close proximity of participants in elements like spin classes and changerooms at gyms and swimming pools  were all problematic. "There are a whole lot of factors here," he said. The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in the state is now 3,087. Mr Hazzard said the number of tests was fewer than was liked at 6,809, down from 8,995 on the previous 24 hours.  The total number of people tested in NSW to date is now 418,427.  NSW Health's Dr Christine Selvey said the one new recorded case was a person who had returned from the United Kingdom and there was "no risk" of community transmission. NSW Transport Minister Andrew Constance outlined plans ahead of school attendance returning to normal from tomorrow. Parents have been advised to drop children at school where possible, or have students walk or ride if they can. He said the aim was to minimise the numbers of people using public transport. So far numbers have been reduced by 3.3 per cent week on week, with bus use down by 10 per cent. Mr Constance also said there had been 85 million vehicle movements per day, compared with normal levels of 105 million a day. Other measures to be introduced will be a shuttle service running from Moore Park to the city, and also marshals and security teams working in 20 key interchanges including Blacktown, Hurstville and Chatswood. 
Eco-friendly coffins on the rise as Australians look to reduce their environmental footprint
Jan Abel and her partner Murray were among a dozen people who signed up to an eco coffin-making workshop with the hope of reducing their environmental footprint  in both life and death. At the first session, the couple  from Gawler, South Australia  began creating shrouds using natural fibres and designing flat-pack coffins. Murray's sketch featured a vibrant symmetrical motif incorporating his life's many passions. "I'm not ready to go yet so, say in ten or 15 years' time, what's your role?" he asked doula Helen Roberts, who he wanted to help with his end-of-life planning. "I hope in 20 years' time I'll still be there [to help]," she replied. "I don't want to die tomorrow, but I might." Just days after their conversation, Murray had a heart attack and died. "He was a lovely person. We had so much fun," Ms Abel said.  "The day before he died, we were so lucky to be put into [coronavirus isolation] with all the things that we could share together, with art and music and all those sorts of things. "But sadly, by the next morning, he was gone." Murray's family and friends worked together to plan his farewell and decorate a flat-pack coffin. Ms Abel said she wouldn't have known what he wanted unless they had discussed it at the workshop. "I was able to transfer what he wanted onto the coffin and complete it as he wanted to the best of my ability," she said. "It's just been made beautiful because of this project. It would have been so much harder to deal with if I hadn't been able to participate and do his coffin." Organiser Abby Buckley said Murray's death made the eco coffin project more poignant. "We all got to use our skills and think about how to apply our skills sooner than we were planning," she said. "We had this lovely moment where we could come together in COVID-19 restrictions and work with Jan." The program was quickly booked out when it launched in October and has since moved online due to social gathering restrictions. "It's actually worked to our advantage  having the pandemic and people being able to be in their own cocoon and own space to really think about what death is for them and how they want to their body to be treated when they die." Participants have shared their creations  made by crocheting, sewing, felting and painting  and received online talks from experts about dying sustainably. "In Australia, the majority of people are really trying hard to change their ways to live a sustainable life," Ms Buckley said. "We're trying to move from a fossil fuel economy to a renewable economy  And yet, it's like all that thinking goes out the window when we die." "We're learning a dialogue, we're becoming more informed so that when we are working with the professionals in this industry, it's easier for them because they can have a more empowered conversation." Since 2008, more than 170 people have chosen a natural burial at Wirra Wonga in Adelaide's northern suburbs. The area hugs the perimeter of the Enfield Memorial Park and mirrors the native vegetation of adjacent Folland Park Reserve. It was the first dedicated site in Australia where bodies could be naturally buried in biodegradable coffins or wrappings. Graves are marked with trees instead of headstones. "I think for people who are passionate about sustainability, have a lot of values about conservation, this is an appealing process and appealing way to say farewell to the planet," Adelaide Cemeteries Authority chief executive Robert Pitt said. He said natural burials provided consumer choice but also made good business sense. "It's very low-maintenance. It very quickly and very sustainably provides some greenness and better aesthetics to a cemetery," Mr Pitt said. "I'd like to be able to come back in 100 years and see it  my vision is the natural burial ground would have extended  there'll be native trees and scrubs here." Mr Pitt said his sustainability plans extended across all aspects of the business, including the installation of new cremators to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and seeking higher environmental management accreditation. "I'd also love to get rid of any bits of plastic and wire in floral tributes  they're absolutely glorious but we do have some troubles recycling those," he said. "We just think it's the right thing to do and it's also sustainable  there are a lot of reasons why we would do it, in fact, there are very few reasons why we wouldn't." 
Closure of Target Country is a blow to rural communities like mine
Word that Target Country was coming to my hometown was a huge deal  perhaps the biggest news since a popular fast food joint set up shop. In Warwick, in country Queensland, we'd heard all about Target. Many of us knew it well from our trips to the city. But now, we wouldn't have to beg our parents to drive hours for a taste of metropolitan fashion, we could simply duck down to the glossy new shop on Grafton Street. And boy, did we think it was flash. Labelled the 'Country' version of the big city store, it looked and felt like the real deal. There was department store lighting. Nice change rooms. Trendy, better quality clothes you might see in magazines. When Target Country opened in Warwick, two hours west of Brisbane, teenage girls like my sisters, friends and I could spend hours perusing the store's aisles. But experiences like those may soon come to an end. Some stores will close their doors for good within the year and Warwicks shop looks likely to be turned into a Kmart. "It will be massive for Target Country to close," one of my cousins who lives in town tells me. Just this week, she ducked into Target Country for an emergency pair of tracksuit pants for her spirited five-year-old son. "It's so handy that Target Country isn't in the shopping centre. You can park out the front, run in and run out. "If the store in Warwick closed, I'd also really miss having somewhere to go for affordable, yet quality, cotton sheets, towels and good basic clothes for myself." It might sound a little token, but in our town at least, Target Country was its own little thriving community. Our friends worked there, my sister joining them when she turned 14 years and nine months. She worked with people our parents knew, teenage girls we played netball with and older boys she never would've dared to speak to otherwise. You'd always know when there was a school social or formal coming up in Warwick  Target Country would be teeming with young people ready to spend their casual job wages. "It was probably one of the only places in Warwick where teenage girls could buy a cute top or skirt because it was trying to be fashionable but it was also pretty affordable," my sister remembers. For some, it offered something even more, including for one local who was getting married. "She bought her bridesmaids their dresses at Target Country," my sister says. "I can still remember it was a pale orange synthetic silk dress with thin straps. It came below the knee and had quite a flowy skirt. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "All the bridesmaids came in and tried them on and it was a really exciting day for everyone." For us bush kids, Target Country introduced us to a whole new world of homewares, toys and electronics. We learned to navigate the concept of laybuy. We had a broader range of bras to choose from. We could even buy activewear. How would we  and many other rural communities  feel if we lost Target Country? Like we'd lost a part of our little town  and our history. 
Domestic violence victims on temporary visas need urgent protections, experts warn
Domestic violence victims on temporary visas are being trapped in dangerous situations because they are unable to access crucial support, experts say,and the coronavirus pandemic appears to be exacerbating their plight. Family and domestic violence support services:1800 Respect National Helpline: 1800 737 732Women's Crisis Line (NSW): 1800 656 463Safe Steps Crisis Line (Vic): 1800 015 188Men's Referral Service: 1300 766 491Lifeline (24-hour Crisis Line): 131 114Relationships Australia: 1300 364 277 Despite several inquiries recommending changes to Australia's visa system, advocates say the government has consistently failed to take action, leaving many temporary visa holders experiencing abuse without access to key health and social services, including Centrelink, Medicare and housing. Perpetrators also commonly use victims' temporary migration status as a weapon of coercion, meaning many feel pressured to stay in violent relationships.  With more than two million people in Australia on temporary visas, advocates are calling for urgent protections, with family violence services reporting COVID-19 restrictions have triggered a surge in calls from women locked out of the system. It comes following the death this week of Western Sydney woman, Kamaljeet Sidhu, who was allegedly murdered by her husband less than a month after police took out an apprehended violence order against him.  Ms Sidhu, 27, had moved with her husband from India to Australia two years ago, and was on a student visa at the time of her death. Michal Morris, the chief executive of inTouch Multicultural Centre Against Family Violence, said that since March her service had seen a 20 per cent increase in the number of women calling for help with family violence, many of whom are temporary visa holders.  "Because they're on a temporary visa, they have very limited access to employment and Centrelink benefits. They're also not eligible for any of the government stimulus package supports and ... tend to work as casuals or in industries which were shut down pretty quickly, for example restaurants or beauty salons," Morris told ABC News.  Refuges often have to make "difficult decisions" to turn away women on temporary visas, Morris said, because their lack of income and access to housing often means they have to stay longer than other women fleeing violence. "We're forcing support services to make really horrible choices. If a woman is in a legitimate relationship in Australia and is experiencing family violence, we need to be able to support her to leave the relationship, but also to recover." Marie Segrave, an associate professor of criminology at Monash University, said many women also avoid seeking help with domestic violence because they're being coerced by partners who use their temporary migration status as "leverage for abuse".  "The main thing we have consistently failed to recognise in Australia is that perpetrators are enabled and emboldened by the limits on what support we provide to women on temporary migration visas," Dr Segrave told ABC News.  For example, Dr Segrave said she had encountered cases of women on temporary visas whose partners have forced them to work more hours than they're permitted to, then threatened to report them to immigration under the false pretence they'll be deported. The partners of other women have threatened to withdraw sponsorship of their visas if they do not comply with demands.  "These women are invisible, and the system supports their perpetrators remaining invisible and not being held to account," Dr Segrave said. "The refusal to recognise that temporary migration creates specific forms of vulnerability ... means women's safety is compromised repeatedly, because we know what the consequences are." These vulnerabilities have been examined in detail by a series of major inquiries over the last decade, all of which have recommended specific and urgent reforms, including to address the inconsistencies in access to services between states. This includes the Australian Law Reform Commission in 2011, Victoria's Royal Commission into Family Violence in 2016, the NSW Domestic Violence Death Review team in 2017, and the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs in 2019. In its latest report, published in March, the NSW DV Death Review Team said it had made several recommendations directed at the Commonwealth Government to address the vulnerability of women on temporary visas, an issue it said was reflected in "a number of cases" in previous review periods.  However, it said, "there has been very little, if any, action in response to these recommendations".  The review team said it had been advised by settlement services that "vulnerable or impermanent visa status remains one of, if not the most, significant issue for their clients who are experiencing domestic violence". And the Senate Inquiry into dowry abuse last year made several recommendations pertaining to Australia's migration program, urging the Commonwealth Government to consider reforms including that family violence protections in the Migration Regulations (1994) be extended beyond certain visa categories and that a temporary visa be made available for holders who are experiencing serious family violence. But more than a year after the inquiry handed down its final report, the Government has yet to respond. Hayley Foster, chief executive of Women's Safety NSW, said the lack of meaningful action means frontline workers face "heart-wrenching" situations on a daily basis.  "When we contact these women, say after a police incident, to ask them how they would like us to support them, we feel so helpless in being unable to offer them real solutions," Foster said.  "It really is a terrible feeling when you go home at the end of the day knowing that women and children are essentially being forced to live in terror because they have nowhere else to go." Foster said the National Advocacy Group on Women on Temporary Visas Experiencing Violence had told the government that "this is a dangerous gap in the domestic violence service system, with lives at stake" but "we simply haven't seen the political leadership in addressing it".  "We need to reform the migration system so that all women on temporary visas who experience domestic violence and their dependents can access protections, services and justice," Foster said.  "How urgent is this problem? Women are dying." A spokesperson for Communities and Justice NSW said the Government was committed to supporting all women experiencing domestic and family violence and funds "a number of initiatives" to help overcome the barriers faced by women on temporary protection visas.  They said the Government had also raised the need for "further support" for victims on temporary visas with the federal government "on multiple occasions".  "This was most recently discussed at this week's Women's Safety Council COAG meeting attended by all relevant officials and Ministers," the spokesperson said. "Senior officials are working closely on solutions to address this issue." Dr Segrave said there had been "some commitment" to fixing the problem, including by recognising it in the fourth national plan to reduce violence against women and children, but that it had "clearly dropped off the agenda". "Women's safety, the rate of family violence in our community, the kinds of harm that are occurring and the long-term impacts  this is absolutely a national emergency," she said. "And we are missing a significant opportunity to address it,."  
Former PNG prime minister Peter O'Neill charged with misappropriation, corruption and abuse of office
Former Papua New Guinea prime minister Peter O'Neill has been charged with misappropriation, official corruption and abuse of office. Mr O'Neill was arrested by police at Jackson's International Airport in Port Moresby on Saturday afternoon after flying back from Brisbane where he had been stranded because of COVID-19 lockdowns. Police say the investigation surrounds the purchase of two generators from Israel for 50 million kina ($21.8 million) when Mr O'Neill was leading the country. In a statement, Assistant Commissioner of Crimes Hodges Ette alleged Mr O'Neill directed payments for the purchase of the generators without due consideration for procurement processes, without approval of parliament and without a tender process. "Mr O'Neill directed the National Executive Council to convene and approved the payment of K50 million for the generators after the purchase was made," he said. Mr O'Neill has described the case as "highly politicised" and defended the handling of the purchase. "I look forward to having my day in court soon so that the truth can prevail and this injustice corrected and exposed," he said in a statement. Mr O'Neill also questioned why current Prime Minister James Marape, who was finance minister at the time, was not being investigated. On Facebook, Mr Marape said "the work of police would not be impeded by myself as Prime Minister". He urged people to respect Mr O'Neill and the legal process. Mr O'Neill led Papua New Guinea for seven years, before quitting in 2019 after a string of high-profile resignations from his government.  Police attempted to arrest Mr O'Neill in October last year over a different issue.  He denied any wrongdoing and said it was a "political witch hunt". Police withdrew that warrant after Mr O'Neill challenged its validity in court. Police said the former prime minister will be allowed bail and will be expected to be quarantined at his own residence for the next 14 days after being interviewed, in line with current COVID-19 regulations. 
Ex-Tropical Cyclone Mangga set to bring 'once-in-a-decade' storm to Western Australia
Weather forecasters say one-third of Western Australia may receive rain due to a "once-in-a-decade" storm, as the remnants of ex-Tropical Cyclone Mangga impact the coast. A severe weather warning is in place south-west of a line from Onslow to Esperance, but the Bureau of Meteorology (BOM) said it was still too early to pinpoint exactly which towns would be most severely impacted. The worst of the incoming wild weather is forecast to hit the north-west coast this afternoon, before the storm heads further south towards Perth. BOM forecaster Jessica Lingard said wind gusts were increasing at coastal towns  including Carnarvon and Exmouth  as the leading edge of the system began to move through, and conditions were expected to worsen further south as the day continued. But Ms Lingard said a deep, low-pressure system coming in from the south was forecast to cause hazardous conditions in the south-west tonight. "We are going to expect to see a couple of smaller low-pressure systems forming off the west coast and anywhere around wherever those lows form, we'll start to see some gusts that could reach up to 130kph," Ms Lingard said. "They'll be mostly coastal locations, but we will be seeing some stronger wind gusts inland as well." Heavy rainfall of up to 100 millimetres, plus abnormally high tides, are also forecast. "We are looking to see rain across much of the western third of the state, coastal areas are obviously going to see a little bit more than those inland," Ms Lingard said. Ex-Tropical Cyclone Mangga was downgraded to a tropical low in the early hours of Saturday morning as it moved south-west of the Cocos Keeling Islands and towards WA's north-west coast. The storm is expected to produce destructive winds of up to 130 kilometres per hour, heavy rainfall and unusually high tides to over 1,000 kilometres of coastline as it travels south from Sunday morning until Monday. BOM state manager James Ashley said the breadth of the warning area was unusual, spanning from Karratha to Esperance, including Perth. "This is a really rare event for WA," he said. "Not only is it unusual for the time of year, it extends across a large part of the state." In Perth, the wet weather is forecast to continue throughout the week. Mr Ashley said it was difficult to pinpoint exactly which areas will be hardest hit by the storms. "The message is that the whole west coast is at risk with this event, we're expecting to see multiple centres," he said. "While one system might impact the northern half of the coast, another system might impact the south-west." Department of Fire and Emergency Services (DFES) acting assistant commissioner Jon Broomhall said people need to act now to secure their homes. "Normally, our storms come from the south-west," he said. "This is going to come from the north-west so it'll test people's buildings, sheds, and all those unsecured items. "We're asking people to secure property, make sure everything loose is tied down." Mr Broomhall also warned people not head out on the water. "We don't need our marine rescue volunteers' lives put at risk by people making silly decisions to go boating or surfing in these conditions." Waves along the coast are expected to reach up to 8 metres high, likely causing widespread beach erosion. Fire bans are also in place for the southern half of WA, with people told to halt any back-burning programs they had scheduled at their properties. "We don't want fires running and a storm at the same time," Mr Broomhall said. "So please, extinguish your planned burn now." Electricity distributor Western Power said its crews were preparing for potentially significant outages and disruption to the grid. "No matter what happens, we're ramping up our crews in preparation to respond to whatever this storm does produce in the way of outages," Western Power spokesman Paul Entwistle said. Specialist crews would be ready to assess any power hazards reported by the community, Mr Entwistle added. "During the storm, if you do see a fallen power line or any damage to the network, please stay 8 metres clear at least, and make the safe call to Western Power on 13 13 51," Mr Entwistle said. He also said people should check their yards for any items or branches which could be flung into power lines during the storm. With intrastate borders now open, crowds had been expected on highways leading out of Perth but the severe weather warning caused many to revise their plans. Mr Broomhall said people should avoid travelling during the storm, particularly Perth holiday-makers who had travelled to the South West. "I understand people want to get out and about but the advice is to travel home early," he said. "Absolutely try and get back home as soon as you can." Jonelle Jones, manager of the Crooked Carrot cafe on Forrest Highway south of Perth, said most customers had told her they planned to be off the road by Sunday morning before the storm hit. "[Drivers] are concerned, so they are going to go home and make sure everything is tied down," she said. While Sunday was expected to be quieter at the cafe, Ms Jones said the early part of the weekend was very busy. "Roads are back to some sort of normal," she said.  "It's amazing to see it so busy, so quickly." She said customers had been telling her they just wanted to be on the road  "just to be free again"  after travel restrictions were lifted. "There's a lot visiting family, that has probably been the biggest [reason for travel], is getting back to see their family," Ms Jones said. Mandurah resident Bev Baldwin was travelling to Margaret River and Augusta to go electric biking with her family, but decided to scale back the trip ahead of the storm. "We were thinking of going down for the weekend, but we decided not to go for the whole weekend, we're just going to go for the day," she said. "It's just nice. When you know you can't do something, you just think 'oh, but I want to do it'." No new COVID-19 cases were recorded in WA on Saturday, almost a week after restrictions were eased. There are no longer any confirmed cases in regional WA after a patient in the Goldfields recovered. There are just two active coronavirus cases left in WA  both are recovering at home in Perth. However, WA's total number of cases was revised up to 560 after three historical cases were identified through blood tests. Two of the cases, which were connected to cruise ships, had already recovered from the disease when they entered WA. The remaining case was a returned overseas traveller, who had contact with a known case and self-isolated when she became ill. The Health Department said the historical cases were no longer infectious and therefore posed no risk to the public. Latest information from the WA Health Department 
Sydney has turned into a renter's market amid the pandemic with falling prices and rising vacancies
The Sydney property market has seen rent prices in the city drop by more than $100 amid the coronavirus pandemic as renters return home or move in with others to share costs. Inner Sydney currently has a 13.8 per cent rental vacancy rate, compared with 6.5 per cent last year, the latest data from SQM Research shows. Weekly rental prices in the CBD have also fallen by more than $100-a-week, compared with the same time last year. "We've never seen anything like it," said Grant Ashby, the director of Sydney Cove Property. "In our time, it's always been a corporate market. This is the first time we've seen such a drop in rents." Property experts say as well as a drop in weekly prices across the city  known worldwide for its high cost of living  vacancies have skyrocketed. "There's more scope now in terms of vacancies for tenants to negotiate a lower rent than there has been in any time that I can remember," said Chris Martin from the City Futures Research Centre at UNSW.  For the first time in years, the market has given renters the confidence to shop around and aim big in a market that has in past years locked many people out of their ideal home. "It's definitely a renter's market," Sydneysider Tim Walker said at a Surry Hills inspection. "We're looking to get something a bit bigger and also I guess to take advantage of the savings," he said. "We've just been pretty lucky that we've found a few places that are probably a bit cheaper by, say, $100 or more, than what they'd normally be," said rental inspector Matthew Baker. "Well, what I'm paying for now, I could get a place here for the same price but so much better," Riley Ellem said after seeing a unit on York Street in the City. The changes within the market are being caused by a number of factors related to the coronavirus pandemic, including renters returning home and relationships taking the next step.  "People are moving in with other people, people are flying back overseas, if they're students, they're leaving," said Parramatta property manager Bernie Mitchell.  Living closer to the city is now an option for many who thought it would never be possible and experts say that if you are thinking of making the change, now is the time to do it. "It went quickly down, it will go quickly back up again," Grant Ashby said. For those whose income or living arrangements have been unaffected by the pandemic, one expert said cheaper rent is not off the table. "Even people who aren't technically affected by COVID can talk to their real estate agent or talk to their landlord about reducing the rent," Dr Chris Martin said. "Because the market has moved down as well."  Find out more 
China will have to be mindful of which Australian exports they target next if they don't want to hurt their own interests
There have been reports that China is considering escalating its trade war with Australia by targeting more Australian exports. Chinese officials have reportedly drawn up a list of potential goods including dairy, wine, seafood, oatmeal and fruit, that may face stricter quality checks or tariffs if political tensions don't ease. But Beijing will have to be mindful of which Australian-produced goods they target if they don't want to hurt Chinese interests. Why? Because Chinese investors own some of Australia's largest agricultural and food manufacturing companies that export to China. There is no publicly available register in Australia that shows the extent of Chinese investment in Australian-based companies. Calls to the offices of Agriculture Minister David Littleproud and Treasurer Josh Frydenberg proved fruitless. However, Professor Peter Drysdale from the Australian National University has painstakingly compiled some of the investment data by cross-checking figures from sources such as the Foreign Investment Review Board with company reports and news stories. The information is available on ANU's Chinese Investment in Australia (CHIIA) database of Mainland Chinese direct commercial investment in Australia. A separate joint project between KPMG and Sydney University helps to further reveal the extent of Chinese outbound direct investment in Australia. Here are some of examples of Chinese investment in Australia's export industries that could face uncertainty in the current trade environment. Earlier this month, China suspended imports from four of Australia's largest abattoirs  three in Queensland and one in NSW  on what Chinese authorities said was a "technical issue." The three Queensland meatworks were Kilcoy Pastoral Company, the JBS-owned Beef City, near the Queensland Darling Downs, and Dinmore near Brisbane. The NSW company was the Northern Cooperative Meat Company, in Casino. Interestingly, the Kilcoy Pastoral Company is controlled by one of China's biggest private agribusinesses, New Hope Group. In 2015, Kilcoy became part of Kilcoy Global Foods, an international conglomerate with largely Chinese backing. The news sent shockwaves through Australia's beef industry, given Australia's beef export trade jumped to $2.87 billion last year, from $1.37 billion in 2018. Chinese demand accounted for almost 25 per cent of Australian beef exports last year. There have been suggestions the suspensions placed on the four abattoirs were retribution for Australia's role in calling for an independent review into the origins of, and China's response to, the COVID-19 outbreak. Both Trade Minister Simon Birmingham and Agriculture Minister David Littleproud have denied any suggestion the move is linked to Australia's call for an inquiry. "Let me just put into perspective, one of those abattoirs is in fact partially Chinese-owned, so they've imposed this temporary ban on one of their own companies here in Australia," Mr Littleproud said earlier this week. "So I think we just need to take a calm look at these and look at them individually and make determinations from that." It's not just the beef industry that is worried. Australia's dairy industry is also watching the trade crackdown. But any moves to expand the trade restrictions to dairy products could impact Chinese-backed Australian exporters. Over the past five years, Greater China (China, Hong Kong, and Macau) has been one of the fastest-growing export markets for Australia's dairy industry. In 2018-19, it accounted for 30 per cent of Australia's dairy exports by volume (worth $1 billion), with Japan in second place with 12 per cent (worth $550 million). The Morrison Government seems to be betting that all it needs to do is hold its nerve and hold the line when it comes to China's trade threats. It is the single-largest export market for a range of Australia's dairy goods: liquid milk, milk powder, butter, even live dairy cows. With Chinese consumers becoming increasingly attracted to Australia's safe and healthy dairy products, Chinese businesses have shown a keen interest in local milk producers and dairy farms. After the 2008 baby formula scandal in China, which left as many as 300,000 infants sick and six dead, Chinese consumers turned to local manufacturers of infant formula, such as A2 and Bellamy's Australia, with sales surging to China through informal "Daigou" shopping channels. And last year, Bellamy's Australia  one of Australia's largest manufacturers of baby formula  was sold to Chinese dairy giant Mengniu for $1.5 billion. Mengniu is part-owned by the Chinese Government's China National Cereals, Oil and Foodstuffs Corporation. Mengniu also recently paid $600 million for Lion's dairy division, which includes brands under licence: Dairy Farmers, Masters and Pura milk; Big M, Dairy Farmers and Pura Classic flavoured milk; Dare and Farmers Union iced coffee; Vitasoy soy milk and coconut milk; and juice brands Daily Juice, The Juice Brothers and Berri; and Yoplait yoghurt. In 2016, Mengniu bought a 79 per cent stake in Burra Foods, one of Victoria's major dairy processors. Also in 2016, then-treasurer Scott Morrison approved the sale of Tasmanian-based dairy business Van Dieman's Land Company (VDL) to Chinese company Moon Lake for $280 million. At the time, Moon Lake outlined a plan to transport fresh milk directly from Tasmania to China on weekly flights, but by June last year no such flights had occurred. As the Chinese middle class has expanded, its taste for foreign wine has grown. China is now the world's third-largest market for imported wine, behind the United States and Germany. According to the Australian Trade and Investment Commission, Australia is the second-largest wine supplier to China after France. To put that in perspective, in 2019 Chinese wine export pioneer Warren Randall said Australian wine exports had grown from 1 million litres a year in 1997 to more than 150 million litres a year by 2019. Last year, Australian exports of wine to China reached a record $1.25 billion, an increase of 18 per cent in 12 months  almost half of the total value of Australia's $2.89 billion global wine exports. The growth of the wine market has seen Australian industry figures report growing investor interest from China in Australian vineyards. However, as with other industries, there is no publicly available list of the level of Chinese ownership in Australia's wineries. In 2018, China state media reported the country's largest wine producer, Yantai Changyu Pioneer Wine Co, bought an 80 per cent stake in Kilikanoon Estate of Adelaide, for $20.6 million, to help meet Chinese consumers' demand for wine. It said roughly 10 per cent of Kilikanoon's total output was sold to China, but that figure was expected to reach 50 per cent as production increased. By 2018, it was estimated Chinese-backed investors owned up to 10 per cent of South Australia's famous Barossa Valley winemaking region. One of those companies was Chateau Yaldara, bought by businessman Arthur Wang in 2014 for $15.5 million. Mr Wang also owns another Barossa Valley winery, 1847 Wines, which he purchased in 2010. Max's Vineyard was sold in 2018 to a Chinese-backed investor for just over $3 million, while Cimicky Wines sold for $6.6 million. In the same year, one of Australia's biggest wine industry investments in 10 years came from Weilong Wine Grape Company, which raised $120 million through a share placement to build a winery in Mildura, Victoria. Other agribusiness projects with Chinese backing include the 93,000-hectare cotton giant Cubbie Station on the Queensland-NSW border. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Agribusiness is one of the most nervous sectors watching relations sour between Beijing and Canberra. But it's not the only one. As with agribusiness though, restrictions on Australian exports across a wider range of sectors could also impact Chinese interests. This week, for instance, China revised customs rules for its iron ore imports, which prompted concern for the future of Australia's biggest export. China currently relies on Australia for two thirds of its iron ore demand to satisfy its insatiable need for steel. Years ago, it was that need for steel that prompted its investment in one of Australia's biggest mining companies, Fortescue Metals. In 2009, Hunan Valin bought into Fortescue, then Australia's third-biggest iron ore producer, for $US771 million. It has since sold down its stake, but it still has an interest in the company. Australia's coal industry has been targeted in the past by Chinese officials wanting to send a message to Canberra. Australian grain farmers have stopped sowing barley mid-stream in some paddocks as they brace for lower prices and the prospect of losing a major market in a brewing trade storm. Last year, Australian coal shipments were made to wait at Chinese ports while solutions were found through diplomatic channels over a flare-up in Sino-Australian relations. Any move against Australia's coal industry risks hurting Chinese financial interests. A major player in Australia's coal industry is Yancoal Australia, controlled by Chinese state-owned enterprise Yankuang Group. It is one of Australia's largest global thermal coal exporters, with China a key market. Trade tensions with China are not new. In recent years, Australia has walked an increasingly difficult tight-rope between economic and national interests. However, China's position as a developing nation means it is just as reliant on imports of Australian agricultural and mining products as Australia's export industry is reliant on China. Earlier this month, Prime Minister Scott Morrison said while Australia works "every day on our relationship with China" it also paid to remember it was "a mutually beneficial partnership." "And within that partnership, there are issues that need to be addressed from time to time," he said. "One of the most important things about our approach to the relationship is we're always consistent, we draw very clear lines about things that are important to us, as does the Chinese Government, and we respect their lines as we expect our lines to be respected." 
Australia joins Canada and UK in condemning China's move to 'clearly undermine' Hong Kong's autonomy
Australia has banded with the United Kingdom and Canada in describing China's plan to impose a strict national security law on Hong Kong as deeply concerning and undermining the city's autonomy. Beijing wants to introduce the legislation that would expand its ability to monitor and oversee Hong Kong's security operations and target people seeking to undermine China's authority. The proposal was raised at China's National Congress and follows the widespread protests by Hong Kong residents concerned Beijing was undermining the freedoms promised when the city was handed back to China by the UK in 1997. Australia's Foreign Minister Marise Payne, British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab and Canadian Foreign Minister Francois-Philippe Champagne have issued a statement critical of China's plan. For two decades, Beijing has been frustrated by opposition to security laws in Hong Kong. But Xi Jinping is now convinced winning local support is futile, writes Bill Birtles. "The legally binding Joint Declaration, signed by China and the United Kingdom, sets out that Hong Kong will have a high degree of autonomy," the three ministers said. "It also provides that rights and freedoms, including those of the person, of the press, of assembly, of association and others, will be ensured by law in Hong Kong and that the provisions of the two United Nations covenants on human rights  shall remain in force." The trio suggested it could be a power grab. "Making such a law on Hong Kong's behalf, without the direct participation of its people, legislature or judiciary, would clearly undermine the principle of 'One Country, Two Systems', under which Hong Kong is guaranteed a high degree of autonomy," the ministers said. Chinese officials say they may directly set up special offices in Hong Kong to oversee the city's national security efforts in the wake of last year's pro-democracy unrest. When Britain handed Hong Kong back to China in 1997, remaining citizens were promised British capitalism and laws. In the intervening years, some argue that Beijing has squandered its promises. A state-controlled news agency accused the city's pro-democracy opposition of having "schemed with external forces in attempts to create a 'colour revolution'". Beijing has repeatedly alleged that the pro-democracy camp was receiving support from the CIA in the United States, as well as other foreign governments. A Chinese official said the National Congress was exercising its "constitutional power" to set up a new legal framework and enforcement mechanism to ensure national security in Hong Kong. Activists say the new laws could be a knockout blow for Hong Kong's one country, two systems deal with China. 
'Complete inaccuracies': Viral Facebook post about COVID-19 tests debunked
CoronaCheck is RMIT ABC Fact Checks regular email newsletter dedicated to fighting the misinformation infodemic surrounding the coronavirus outbreak. You can read the latest edition below, and subscribe to have the next newsletter delivered straight to your inbox. A couple of weeks ago we reported a story on Clive Palmer and his claimthat the use of the drug hydroxychloroquine had been a major factor in the Australia's low number of COVID-19 deaths. He made that claim after announcing he'd bought 33 million doses of the drug to donate to Australia's medical stockpile. We've now fact checked that claim, and found itto be baseless. We've also looked at a claim made by Agriculture Minister David Littleproud that Australia has the "most secure food security in the world". We found that claimto be in the ballpark. Also investigated by us this week: a Facebook post attributed to the Department of Health claims common coronavirus tests can't distinguish COVID-19 from other illnesses. The Department told us that was incorrect. A postshared widely on Facebookand attributed to the Department of Health claims that tests for the novel coronavirus, known as SARS-COV-2, are not able to distinguish the virus from other illnesses. "It should be noted that PCR tests cannot distinguish between "live" virus and non-infective RNA,"the post states. "This means the test cannot [distinguish] covid from a cold or measles or ebola." As Australian Medical Association ACT President Antonio Di Dio explained to the ABCin March, Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) tests are the most widely used COVID-19 tests in Australia, and work by taking a "fingerprint" of RNA from a patient. "In the context of COVID-19, you get a piece of the RNA from a swab of the patient, you double it, then again and again,"Dr Di Dio said. "Until you have millions of copies." Within a few hours, the sample would be large enough to see whether COVID-19 is present. A caption alongside the Facebook post claims the information has been taken "from [the Department of Healths] own website". In a statement, a department spokesman told RMIT ABC Fact Check the post contained "selectively chosen information taken out of context" from afactsheet for clinicians, along with "complete inaccuracies". "The factsheet is actually dealing with COVID-19 positive people continuing to test positive after the infectious period has passed,"the spokesman said. "It is true that the PCR may still result in a positive test, because of remaining non-infectious viral load within the patient." He said the test would not detect any pathogen other than the SARS-COV-2 virus. Touted by some as a miracle cure for COVID-19, the anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine was thrust into the spotlight again this week when US President Donald Trumprevealedhe was taking it to avoid contracting the illness. Billionaire businessman Clive Palmer says Australia has given credit to hydroxychloroquine for Australia's low coronavirus death rate. The drug recently made headlines in Australia when outspoken businessman Clive Palmer donated almost 33 million doses reportedlymore than the equivalent of entire US stocks  to Australias national medical stockpile. In a series of newspaper ads and TV interviews, Mr Palmer claimed hydroxychloroquine was behind Australias low mortality rate, which he said had fallen since the drug was made available to treat hospitalised coronavirus patients in early April. But can Australias success be linked to the drug?Fact Check asked the experts andfound Mr Palmers claim to be baseless. In fact, the drug was already available to hospital patients, and experts said the death curve had flattened because just a few weeks earlier the case curve had done the same. The jury is still out on whether the drug works as a treatment for COVID-19. However, the evidence isn't promising. Given the known risks of hydroxychloroquine, Australia's medicines regulatory body strongly advises against giving it to coronavirus patients in the absence of positive clinical trial results. It feels like ancient history, but for a time, just a few short weeks ago, supermarket shelves normally filled with toilet paper, pasta, flour and cleaning supplies were bare and the Prime Minister labelled the apparent cause, panic buying, "ridiculous" and "not sensible". Agriculture Minister David Littleproud says that Australia has "the most secure food security in the world". Despite those scenes, federal Agriculture Minister David Littleproud recently declared that Australia had "the most secure food security in the world". "We're a nation of 25 million people," Mr LittleproudtoldABC Radio National's Afternoon Briefing program on May 11. "We produce enough food for 75 million." In afact check published earlier this week, we found that claim to be in the ballpark. Many studies and experts say Australia enjoys a very high level of food security, exports far more than it needs and has ample alternative sources of certain foods should they become scarce. In terms of Australia's international ranking, we're not quite the most food secure nation but one comparison places us 12th among 113 countriesin terms of food security. NewsGuard, a self-described "internet trust tool", has published a listof Twitter "super spreaders"  accounts that "repeat, share and amplify" coronavirus misinformation and myths to large numbers of followers. The 10 accounts listed by NewsGuard reach a combined 3.3 million followers and have continued to publish misinformation despite Twitterannouncinga crackdown on March 18 in a bid to address the so-called "infodemic". Included in the list are the accounts of former Nigerian politician Femi Fani-Kayode, conservative radio commentator Bill Mitchell and former British footballer David Icke. The accounts have propagated myths including that COVID-19 does not exist and that zinc or herbal remedies can prevent or cure the virus, and are spreading unproven claims about the effect of 5G technology on the virus. Misinformation about Bill Gates and his involvement in global public health seems to spread exponentially with each passing day, with the billionaire tech founder and philanthropist the alleged 'villain'in a number of convoluted coronavirus conspiracy theories. This week, fact checkers atIndia Todayfound that a photo of Mr Gates and top US infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci apparently flaunting social distancing and face mask rules was taken in December 2018, long before the coronavirus outbreak. Another claim linking the men, which suggested that Dr Fauci served on Microsofts board of directors, was found to be false byAP Fact Check. Though not related to the coronavirus, a rumour has also been spread online that Mr Gates visited disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein's private island multiple times. That claim, too, is false, according toReuters. Meanwhile,Politifactfound that the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation was not set to make a profit from the development of a coronavirus vaccine, whileReutersfound that Mr Gates did not present to the Pentagon a plan to immunise religious fanatics. Speaking of religion,Reutersalso found Mr Gates had not advocated for the permanent banning of religious gatherings. Melinda Gates has also been the victim of online rumours, including a claim, debunked bySnopes, that she wore a satanic symbol during a TV interview. US President Donald Trump this week claimed that he had been taking hydroxychloroquine as a COVID-19 preventative, prompting scorn from political adversaries including House of Representatives Speaker Nancy Pelosi, a Democrat. "He's our president, and I would rather he not be taking something that has not been approved by the scientists, especially in his age group and, shall we say, his weight group,[which] is morbidly obese, they say,"Ms Pelositold CNN. While her comments weremet with gleeby some, othershave accused her of"fat shaming". But was her comment accurate? Not quite, according to fact checkers atPolitiFact, who found that based on figures from Mr Trump's latest physical examination he would not be considered "morbidly obese"bymedical standards. Weighing in at 243 pounds (110 kilograms) and measuring 6 feet 3 inches (191 centimetres), Mr Trump just falls into the obese category. And while some pundits have questioned the official height and weight figures provided by Mr Trump, PolitiFact found that he would need to be shorter than 5 feet 8 inches (173 centimetres) and weigh 260 pounds (118 kilograms) to be classified"morbidly obese". Got a fact that needs checking? Tweet us@ABCFactCheckor send us an email atfactcheck@rmit.edu.au 
COVID-19 worries and study stress 'just not healthy' for HSC students, but there are signs of resilience
Uncertainty has been one of the most challenging hallmarks of COVID-19 for Year 12 student Olivia Condon. During the hours spent in online lessons, the 17-year-old found it impossible to stop her mind from worrying about the future. "I felt really anxious, thinking 'Am I going to get a bad mark, when are we going back to school?'," she said. "My mind was constantly asking questions I couldn't answer." She is one of thousands of high school students across the country dealing with a global pandemic while preparing for the most important exams of their young lives. Youth workers say instances of self-harm and suicidal thoughts have risen significantly among young people in recent months. While some students have remained resilient, the upheaval has prompted calls for education providers to focus more on wellbeing than marks. For Olivia, the low point came shortly after she stopped going to classes in early April. "It was really hard to keep doing work because stress just kept piling up and you didn't get a break, you were stressed but you still had to do the work," she said. She also worried about classmates with difficult home lives. "The only thing that kept them going was school and seeing their friends, so COVID had such a negative impact for them," she said. The coronavirus outbreak has caused an unprecedented increase in demand for mental health support services for young people. The Kids Helpline reported a 40 per cent rise in demand for counselling services in March. Project Youth supports at-risk young people in Sydney's south with crisis accommodation, employment, and respite from troubles at home. Operations manager Kevin Crowe said the amount of young people needing assistance had never been greater, with referrals coming from as far away as Victoria. "It's been a nightmare to be honest," he said. "We've had a big increase in anxiety and depression  suicidal ideation and self-harming. "We've had an increase in referrals, especially for kids under 16 who are not able to stay at home  it's quite frightening actually."  Despite efforts to provide online tutoring, Mr Crowe said many students trying to complete their secondary education will drop out due to complications caused by COVID-19. "They're falling through the gaps, which is very sad," he said.  It's an escalation that did not surprise Will Stubley from Year 13, an organisation that helps young people transition from school to adult life. In recent months, his staff have been inundated with concerned students looking for clarity in their final year. Mr Stubley said the focus on academia in the final years of high school forced an unhealthy amount of pressure onto young people. "Adding COVID on top, it's just not healthy  that stress and anxiety is not necessarily warranted," he said. Despite the upheaval, there are signs that students are learning to better support each other. Year 12 student Jakub Kamen said the time away from school had taught him the value of reaching out to those who were struggling. "I definitely noticed more people have been down in the dumps, so I would check on a few people, ask how they were going," he said. "You've got to make sure people around you are OK and let them know you're there for them." Olivia said she had also been more emotionally open with her classmates. "Since being at home I've found it so important to check up on people, even if you didn't talk to them much before," she said. "It's been a positive response, I've made friends with people I wouldn't necessarily be close with before." It was a pleasing response for Mr Stubley, who hoped that COVID-19 shutdowns would reinforce the importance of student welfare over marks. "School helps young people become an independent contributor to society and that has come much more to the fore now," he said. "The emphasis has shifted to 'How can we help these young people navigate the period after school?' "That should be the focus anyway." 
Why Annastacia Palaszczuk could win political points in the Queensland-NSW border brawl
Queenslanders don't like being told what to do, especially by their southern neighbours. So it's no surprise we saw a terse and frustrated Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk hit back at pressure from New South Wales leader Gladys Berejiklian to reopen the border  citing NSW's more than 300 active coronavirus cases, compared to Queensland's 12. Latest information from Queensland Health. Ms Palaszczuk has repeatedly said she based her decisions on medical advice to stop NSW and Victorian travellers bringing the illness to the Sunshine State. It seems border closures are far less useful when you're a net exporter of the virus, compared to a net importer. The Premier's choices have been wedged in a tighter political position than usual, with Queensland's October state election creeping closer. Opponents have argued the economic fallout of the pandemic would be extenuated by the border shut-down and commentators suggest the Premier has backed herself into a corner that will result in polling pain.  Ms Palaszczuk has taken the position there could be unspeakable damage to the economy, perhaps irreversible, if a second wave were to enter from southern states through opened borders. And Labor knows, at the moment, it has the political capital on its side, especially in must-win regional areas. There's a shared opinion among some regional communities on the reluctance to wind back a restriction that kept areas completely COVID-19-free. Carpentaria Mayor Jack Bawden seconded the Premier's hard-line border stance. "We should keep them closed  the further we can keep this bloody virus away from the community, the happier we are," Cr Bawden said. Diamantina Mayor Rob Dare fell in line with the general consensus backing Ms Palaszczuk's southern shutdown. "I agree with her  it seems to be all the cases are in New South Wales and Victoria, so I agree with her stance at the moment," Cr Dare said. Even Gold Coast Mayor Tom Tate, who is an advocate for large parts of the tourism industry that have been savaged by coronavirus, has publicly endorsed the stand. And it's not like Queensland's isolation attempt is different from many other states, including locked-up South Australia, Western Australia, Northern Territory and Tasmania, which all have closed borders. Two recent Queensland cases have spooked authorities, who know how easily the hard work could be undone. The Rockhampton nurse whose actions had the potential to  and still could  cause a mass outbreak amongst our most vulnerable, and another case from this week of a woman who was diagnosed with the virus two months after returning from India. Both cases reinforce how tenuous Queensland's hold is on the situation. And it was just two months ago when Queensland was on the precipice of a catastrophic explosion and COVID-19 case numbers were doubling every three days. In the words of Queensland's Chief Health Officer Jeannette Young, it was terrifying. Now that cases have dramatically slowed here, at least one Opposition MP used State Parliament to proclaim "the worst has passed" in their pursuit of relaxing the lockdown measures. But health leaders have been at pains to explain the curve hasn't flattened in Queensland because the virus is gone  it's simply that it's not being spread because of the stringent restrictions. Some LNP insiders admit their regions are expressing the desire to keep our southern neighbours locked out  at least for now. So why has the top tier of the LNP used its public time this week to criticise the Government's decision? The usual political playbook reads that when the Government says something is black, the Opposition claims it's white. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. But over the pandemic months, we've mostly seen a departure from the usual script, to present one united team  locally and nationally. Now, as the days dwindle down towards the election, that cooperative veneer is slipping. LNP Opposition Leader Deb Frecklington, while criticising the Government's decision, also said she would listen to the health advice. It's a pretty glaring contradiction from the LNP that indicates there's little room for unity politics in an election campaign. There is, of course, a risk the sentiment could turn against the Premier as the days of few coronavirus cases continue. But it's plainly irrational the Premier would persist with border closures if they weren't absolutely essential. And Ms Palaszczuk would be banking on the wider support of Queenslanders to back her over her southern counterpart. 
Interest-only loan reprieve coming as banks try to avoid a financial storm, but investors fear it's not enough
One of Australia's major banks has offered relief to thousands of property investors who hold interest-only home loans, responding to claims the industry is not doing enough to stave off a potential property crisis. Westpac has pledged to extend borrowers' interest-only periods after WA Senator Dean Smith criticised the industry for failing to support landlords, many of whom are self-funded retirees, who were struggling with higher repayments due to their loans switching to principal and interest. Senator Smith said he would canvas support for a Senate inquiry into the banks' treatment of property investors after hearing disturbing stories of financial hardship. He said he feared investors pushed to the wall could lead to a worst-case scenario of a "tsunami of forced sales". Westpac has now confirmed borrowers can apply to extend the interest-only periods of their loans for up to a year, instead of being forced to start paying the principal of their loans when it expires. "This includes allowing interest-only customers to extend their loan term for up to 12 months or customers on principal and interest repayments to switch to interest-only repayments for the same period," Will Ranken, Westpac's general manager of home ownership, said. "We recognise that COVID-19 has had a significant impact on household finances and these changes will provide affected customers with more flexibility with their home loan repayments during this time." For Adelaide couple Dianne and Brian McShane, whose loans are with a different bank, Westpac's statement offered little hope. The self-funded retirees were already struggling with their loan repayments before coronavirus hit and now their tenants on the Gold Coast have had to break their lease due to the pandemic. Ms McShane, a former administrative assistant, and her husband, an ex-electrician, started investing in property 20 years ago to try to fund their retirement. They currently have three investment properties, two in Queensland and one in Western Australia. But instead of earning an income from them, the couple in their 60s are paying $9,000 a month to the bank to cover their loans, which switched from interest-only to principal and interest last year. Mr McShane said the couple were running out of funds and would ultimately be forced to sell in the falling housing market. "There will come a day when we are going to run out of money because we are paying all this principal and we'll have to sell everything, and we'll have nothing left," he said. "And we'll have to rely on the pension. "And that's the reason why we invested in property  we didn't want to be a burden." The couple said they asked their bank 12 months ago if they could retain their interest-only terms, but that their application was rejected because they were no longer in the workforce.  They said the bank rang them earlier this week to indicate that they could apply for a new loan, but the pair had little confidence that it will be approved. Sydney investor Mike Scotland, a former school teacher, owes $1.1 million to the banks and is in a similar predicament. Mr Scotland has six investment properties and all the loans have switched to principal and interest. "The rationale was that there is no way to gain wealth in Australia unless you invent a better mousetrap, win the lottery, have a brilliant business or maybe you do a bit of investment," he said. "People think property investors are multi-millionaires but probably about 40 per cent of them never make a profit. "They're not rich, fat cats, they're just people trying to get ahead for the most part." Mr Scotland said all of his properties had either fallen in value or flat-lined, while rents had also dropped. He envisaged he would have to sell in eight or nine months' time, at a loss. "So I'm heading towards a deadline, I'm heading towards a cliff," he said. "The banks are putting a lot of pressure on the economy, that's really the situation." Westpac's policy is in line with recent advice from the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) that the banks could extend interest-only terms during the COVID-19 pandemic and it would not trigger responsible lending obligations. Chief economist with REA group Nerida Conisbee said property investors would be most affected by the COVID downturn because of the impact on the rental market from job losses. But she said it was in the banks' interests to support their customers through the difficult times.  "I can't see it happening that the banks would allow wholesale default of loans or wholesale distress in the property market by forcing people to sell to pay back debt," she said. "The banks are well capitalised. "It is not in their interest for people to start defaulting on loans or sell their properties at a loss." Ms Conisbee said crunch time for the housing market would come when borrowers, including investors, reached the end of the leniency period for mortgage deferrals the banks had introduced. "The big concern now is what happens after that six months," she said. Banking analyst Brett Le Mesurier said the banks had already offered considerable relief to mortgagees, granting relief from paying interest. "It is not like they are taking a hard approach to their customers," he said. "They are actually taking the most sympathetic approach they have ever taken, but of course there are obviously examples that this Senator is aware of where customers are not getting the sort of relief from the major banks that others are. "The danger for the banks granting a lot of relief to people is that you are just creating more problems for the future." NAB issued a statement saying it had a team contacting customers approaching the end of their interest-only terms to work with them on the "right solution, which can include restructuring a loan if required". This included a fast-tracked process for customers with interest-only loans due to expire in the next six months to extend their interest-only period for a year, but this would not apply to borrowers who had reached their maximum interest-only term.   ANZ did not respond to the question of extending interest-only loan periods but said customers could request a repayment deferral on their home loan for up to six months and this included investors paying interest only. The bank said 105-thousand home loan customers had sought assistance. Senator Dean Smith said he welcomed the prospect of more flexibility by the banks, providing the application process for borrowers was not onerous, and requests for extensions were actually granted. "It's encouraging to see one of Australia's major lending institutions change its policy towards the extension of interest-only loans, but these changes now need to be made industry-wide," he said. "I again call on the entire Australian banking and finance sector to extend interest-only loan repayments until the pandemic's financial fallout has passed." 
Australia's coronavirus recovery has many competing values on the table
Half the workforce is now receiving either the JobSeeker or JobKeeper payment. The Australian Government is pumping more cash into the economy as a percentage of GDP than nearly any other country.  And now Josh Frydenberg has declared "there is no money tree". It may sound like an odd declaration from a Treasurer who had no problem whistling up hundreds of billions of dollars in a matter of weeks, but the point Frydenberg is trying to make is that the spending cannot continue. When six months of support payments are up, that's it. The Government will go no further. It will then rely on the Coalition's cupboard of policy "principles and values" to shift nearly 7 million Australians from support payments back into sustainable jobs. Just before he coughed up a lung at the dispatch box on Tuesday, the Treasurer spoke of the "proven path" for growing the economy.  "The values and the principles that have guided Coalition reforms in the past must guide us again in the future," Frydenberg said, listing tax and workplace reform, cutting red tape and upskilling as sure-fire ways to generate some growth. It's too early to know where the Government will land on the specifics here, but perhaps we should look at the Coalition's reform legacy as a guide, given the Treasurer's invitation to do so. The reform record is a patchy one, with a few unhappy memories many on the Coalition side would no doubt rather forget. There were the attempts to deregulate university fees, introduce a GP co-payment, establish a National Energy Guarantee and cut the company tax rate for big business. Each of these ideas bit the dust in the face of internal or opposition resistance.  On other fronts the Coalition has had more success: trimming superannuation perks, cutting income taxes and lowering company tax for smaller firms. In different ways, these successful and unsuccessful measures all involved a smaller role for government.  It's no coincidence that the Prime Minister now talks about a "business-led recovery" rather than a government one. The Coalition hasn't always been able to get its way, but it's maintained a consistent principle of looking for a smaller role for the state. The past few months have been quite the anomaly. The Government is now playing a far bigger role in the economy than ever before, but as it eyes the recovery, the Prime Minister and Treasurer want it known the various support payments for workers, the unemployed, childcare services, pensioners and apprentices are only temporary. By contrast, Anthony Albanese sees an ongoing need for big government, warning against the "law of the jungle and unfettered market forces" as Australia charts its path to recovery.  In a speech to caucus on Monday, the Labor leader pointed to the ALP's "values of fairness, security and the power of government to change lives" as the best way forward. So what reform ideas have these Labor values produced in recent years? We've seen ambitious plans to super-charge spending on education, health, dental care and childcare. All of this was to be paid for by stripping back negative gearing and franking credit tax breaks and increasing tax on the highest income earners.  The problem is, voters didn't like it. At least not enough to stop them punishing Labor with three consecutive election defeats. Since becoming Opposition Leader 12 months ago, Anthony Albanese has been contemplating how to adjust Labor's policy mix. He's been criticised for moving too slowly, but it's probably a good thing he didn't settle on any fixed positions before the game-changing COVID crisis came along.  Now he has an opportunity to weigh up what the post-COVID economy needs and what voters want. It's still far too early to know exactly what the economy will look like as restrictions are eased; which businesses will be viable, what might happen to the global economy and whether the trade relationship with China will recover or continue to deteriorate.  Specific reform proposals are unlikely to emerge from either side until the lay of the land is clearer. Right now, we have competing "values". The Coalition wants a business-led recovery, Labor prefers an ongoing government-led path to growth. The Eden-Monaro by-election may provide some clues as to whether voters have a preference. David Speers is the host of Insiders, which airs on ABC TV at 9am on Sunday or on iview. 
NT coronavirus restrictions continue to lift, with pubs, gyms and beauty salons reopening
The Northern Territory has continued to ease its tough COVID-19 restrictions  allowing pubs, gyms, cafes and nail salons to reopen with extra hygiene measures and two-hour time limits in place. Darwin proprietor Jason Hanna owns several eateries across the Top End including The Deck Bar, Chow, Lazy Susan's and Good Times Bar & Grill. Mr Hanna has been up since 3:00am trying to get some of his restaurants ready to reopen at midday and expects Territorians to come out en masse to support local businesses and quench their thirst. "I think I might not have ordered enough beer [although] we've got buckets of corona on special all day, just to dig it in," he said. "We've got our poor brethren down in places like New South Wales that are allowed to have 10 people in a venue, here we can have 10 people on one table. "We are pretty blessed up here, the weather's 26C nice and cool, the beers flowing and the kitchens ready to go." Northern Territory Chief Minister Michael Gunner said he was excited about the 3,000 people who were back at work on Friday. Industry peak body Hospitality NT said about 450 food and drink venues reopened across the Territory, with more expected to open on June 5 in the third stage of restrictions easing. Mr Gunner thanked Territorians for listening to health advice and making the NT the "safest place in Australia". "It's been 53 days and I think you've all deserved that beer," he said.  Shenannigans, one of the bars on Darwin's popular drinking mile Mitchell Street, booked out completely by opening time at midday.  Sydneysider Charlotte Dubois was among the first to the bar. She said she'd been in Darwin six weeks and due to coronavirus, this was her first chance at a pint in the Top End town. "I can't wait to shove it in my Sydney friends' faces," she said. Bruce Masters said he finished up work early to be at the pub when it opened. "The beer always tastes good. But it's good to be out," he said.  "The plan for today is to enjoy socialising. "What the boss doesn't know doesn't hurt him." Lincoln Jenkins is the Northern Territory sales manager at Carlton and United Breweries.  Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Roughly 175,000 litres of beer have been delivered to the Northern Territory in the last week and Mr Jenkins assured Territorians there would definitely be enough tap beer to last the weekend.  "There will be plenty out there, we won't be running out," he said. "There's enough beer here for what we think is the next two to three weeks." Mr Jenkins said the NT was the "envy of the rest of the country" as pubs reopened and thousands of hospitality workers returned to work. While NT Police Commissioner Jamie Chalker said it was an "exciting day" for the Territory, but he also warned drivers to be safe on the roads.  Commissioner Chalker said there would be a strong police presence in busy centres and parks  and motorists could expect random breath tests. "We really don't want to see a spike in the road toll, and we certainly don't want to see a spike in poor road behaviour," he said.  "Just hit it with a little bit of common sense and appreciate the very rare circumstances we've been able to create in our own 'big bubble' and appreciate it and enjoy it but not risk it. NT Chief Health Officer Hugh Heggie, who joined Commissioner Chalker on a patrol down Mitchell St on Friday afternoon, said most people were doing the right thing.  "The pleasure though this time of the year, when Darwin is such a lovely place to be, and in a premises here, to see people, families, friends, work colleagues in their bubbles, social networks together," he said.  "I can see the enthusiasm and I hope people behave responsibly.  "Everything I've seen is just wonderful, premises and businesses have done this really well." 
The NBA is in discussions with Disney over a potential season restart at the company's Florida complex
The NBA is in talks with The Walt Disney Company on a single-site option for a resumption of play in Central Florida in late July, the clearest sign yet that the league believes the season can continue amid the coronavirus pandemic. The National Basketball Players Association is also part of the talks with Disney. Games would be held at the ESPN Wide World of Sports Complex, a massive campus on the Disney property near Orlando. NBA spokesman Mike Bass said the conversations were still "exploratory", and that the site would be used not only for games but for practices and housing as well. "Our priority continues to be the health and safety of all involved, and we are working with public health experts and government officials on a comprehensive set of guidelines to ensure that appropriate medical protocols and protections are in place," Bass said. The ESPN Wide World of Sports Complex is a 103-hectare campus with multiple arenas that could host games simultaneously and has been home to, among other things, the Junior NBA World Championship in recent years. ESPN is primarily owned by Disney, one of the NBA's broadcast partners. Space won't be an issue, even if Major League Soccer  which is also in talks to resume its season at Disney  is there at the same time as the NBA. Nearly 24,000 hotel rooms owned or operated by Disney are situated within the campus. The NBA suspended its season on March 11, becoming the first of the US major pro leagues to do so after it became known All-Star centre Rudy Gobert of the Utah Jazz tested positive for COVID-19. The list of NBA players known to test positive eventually grew to 10  not all were identified  and commissioner Adam Silver said last month the actual total was even higher. But the league has been working on countless return-to-play scenarios for several weeks, all with the caveat that testing would be an integral part of any resumption of the season. Teams have been allowed to welcome players back to their training facilities for voluntary sessions since May 8, and more than half of the league's franchises have taken advantage of that opportunity. The next steps would likely include a loosening of the restrictions for those voluntary workouts  no more than four players are currently allowed inside any facility at a time  and then a plan for when training camps could open. If the league plans to resume play in late July, then camps conceivably could open around the start of that month. AP 
The Australian share market falls, miners rise as iron ore drives a record trade surplus in March
The Australian share market has closed lower, dragged down by the major banks, but mining stocks have risen after iron ore exports contributed to a record trade surplus in March. The ASX 200 ended down by 0.4 per cent at 5,364 points, while the All Ordinaries index lost 0.3 per cent to 5,449. The major bank stocks all fell sharply, including Westpac (-2.3 per cent), NAB (-2.2 per cent), ANZ (-2.2 per cent) and Commonwealth Bank (-1.8 per cent). Energy stocks also weighed on the broader market, with falls for Oil Search (-2.7 per cent), Santos (-1.9 per cent) and Woodside (-1.4 per cent). Mining stocks lifted in afternoon trade, including BHP (+1.9 per cent) and Fortescue (+1.7 per cent), while Rio Tinto finished in the red (-0.6 per cent). It followed a surge in iron ore exports, which rose by around a third in March as some Chinese factories reopened. The Bureau of Statistics says Australia posted a record trade surplus in the month as exports rose while imports fell due to the coronavirus pandemic hitting global supply chains. Exports jumped by 15 per cent or just over $5.5 billion, seasonally adjusted, to $42.4 billion, with a rise in shipments of iron ore, coal, gold and meat. "We think some of the rise in iron ore exports reflects catch-up demand from the previous month, which saw a week of limited shipping activity due to Cyclone Damien," ANZ economists said. Services exports, such as tourism and education, dropped by 9 per cent or nearly $730 million. Income from travel dropped by $657 million, while income from travel-related services was down $734 million in the month. That was offset by a 4 per cent, or nearly $1.2 billion, fall in imports, in particular, travel and transport services. There was a also a drop in aircraft imports over the month, leaving a record trade surplus of $10.6 billion in March, an increase of $6.7 billion from February. The Australian dollar gained some ground, to about 64.4 US cents. Private employers in the US laid off a record 20.2 million workers last month as a forced shutdown of business to stem the COVID-19 outbreak savaged the economy. The ADP National Employment Report suggested that lockdowns in the US to slow the spread of the coronavirus could leave lasting scars on the economy. In addition, the figures for March were revised up to show private payrolls falling by 149,000 jobs over the month. That is instead of the previously reported 27,000 and is the first decline since September 2017. Chris Rupkey, chief economist at MUFG in New York, said the latest numbers indicated a deep economic downturn. "One thing for sure is that this pandemic health crisis has produced depression-magnitude job losses, which means this recovery is going to take longer than many are thinking," he said. "The Great Depression lasted three-and-a-half years, and it will be a miracle if the economy gets anywhere near back to normal within the next couple of years." More companies announced layoffs overnight, including ridesharing firm Uber, which plans to sack 3,700 employees. The cuts to its customer support and recruiting teams represent about 14 per cent of its nearly 27,000 employees. Uber chief executive Dara Khosrowshahi will also forgo his base salary for the rest of the year. His salary was $US1 million ($1.56 million) in 2019. Uber said the cost of redundancies would be around $US20 million. Mr Khosrowshahi said in a letter to staff that "days like this are brutal" and indicated there could be more job cuts to come. Rideshare rival Lyft announced a loss of $US398.1 million from sales of $US956 million, which was better than expected. The number of active users taking a Lyft trip fell over the first few months of 2020 compared to the last few months of 2019. Yesterday, accommodation sharing giant Airbnb announced that a quarter of its global workforce was being laid off. Meanwhile, another Amazon worker has died from coronavirus, according to CNBC. The employee, who worked at an Amazon warehouse in the US Mid-West, passed away on April 18 and his last day at the facility was on March 19. The death comes after Amazon warehouse employees raised concerns that the company was not doing enough to protect them from catching COVID-19 at work. As digital giants come under fire for misinformation about coronavirus on their platforms, Facebook has announced the first 20 members of its oversight board. The board is an independent body that can overturn the company's content moderation decisions. The members include former editor-in-chief of The Guardian newspaper Alan Rusbridger, retired judge and former European Court of Human Rights vice-president Andras Sajo, and law professor Nicolas Suzor from the Queensland University of Technology. On the markets, the Dow Jones index fell for first time in three days in a late sell-off on the job layoff news. The Dow lost 0.9 per cent to 23,665. The broader S&P 500 fell 0.7 per cent to 2,848.42 and the Nasdaq Composite added 45 points, or half a per cent, to 8,854. The US Treasury Department will launch a 20-year bond and increase securities auction sizes across a range of bonds to raise cash amid record US Government borrowing as it battles the coronavirus. Stocks in Europe ended mainly in the red, with Germany's DAX and the CAC 40 in France losing more than 1 per cent. The FTSE 100 index bucked the trend and rose 0.07 per cent to 5,854 as Prime Minister Boris Johnson said his Government was considering lifting some coronavirus restrictions as soon as Monday. West Texas crude oil dropped 2 per cent to $US24.05 a barrel. Spot gold fell below $US1,700 to nearly $US1,686 an ounce. 
Europe to endure economic shock akin to Great Depression due to coronavirus, finance chiefs say
The collective European economy will contract by 7.7 per cent and inflation in the eurozone will almost disappear this year because of the COVID-19 pandemic, the European Commission forecast on Wednesday. Public debt and budget deficits are also expected to balloon because of economic hardship brought on by the health crisis. "Europe is experiencing an economic shock without precedent since the Great Depression," European Commissioner for Economic and Financial Affairs Paolo Gentiloni said. "Both the depth of the recession and the strength of recovery will be uneven, conditioned by the speed at which lockdowns can be lifted, the importance of services like tourism in each economy and by each country's financial resources." The commission forecast that, as the economy contracts this year, consumer prices will almost stagnate.  The inflation rate will slow to 0.2 per cent in 2020, before accelerating to 1.1 per cent next year, when the eurozone returns to growth of 6.3 per cent. Investment will plunge 13.3 per cent this year, the forecast states. The effort to keep economies alive will boost budget deficits in the eurozone to an aggregate 8.5 per cent of GDP this year, from 0.6 per cent last year, before the gap shrinks to 3.5 per cent in 2021. Coronavirus questions answeredBreaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast.Read moreA surge in public debt, however, will take longer to undo, the commission said, forecasting that eurozone debt will jump to 102.7 per cent of GDP this year from 86 per cent last year. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Italy, Greece, Spain and Portugal will be among the hardest hit, while Luxembourg, Malta and Austria are to weather the shock better. Greek GDP is to contract the most, by 9.7 per cent, with Italy recording the second deepest recession of 9.5 per cent and Spain 9.4 per cent. The budget deficit of Italy, the EU country suffering the most deaths due to coronavirus, will also surge the most  to 11.1 per cent of GDP this year, from 1.6 per cent last year, before falling to 5.6 per cent in 2021, the commission forecast. Find out moreSpain's deficit will top 10 per cent this year, up from 2.8 per cent in 2019, with France close behind at 9.9 per cent. Italy's public debt will also record the biggest increase this year, to 158.9 per cent per cent of GDP, from 134.8 per cent in 2019.  Reuters 
Coronavirus distancing restrictions to ease across Queensland for Mother's Day
Queensland will again ease COVID-19 contact restrictions from Mother's Day this Sunday to allow up to five members from one household to visit another home. "We don't think that will increase risk. It's about one household going to another household," Chief Medical Officer Jeannette Young said. But Dr Young urged people to maintain their distance when visiting other people and to avoid hugging or getting too close "wherever possible". "If you've got different households coming together, try to keep that social distance," she said. "So yes, when you go and visit, because we all want to keep our mums safe  I know I do  it's a good idea to just delay those hugs until we get through all this. "Within a household, of course hug each other but if you've got different households coming together, try and maintain that social distance, it's just being extra cautious but very appropriate." Multiple families can visit the same household as long as it is as different times. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said the easing of restrictions from Mother's Day was happening because "Queensland has been doing such a great job". "I really want to thank Queenslanders for a great job that they have been doing right across our state and I think this is going to be welcomed by families, especially on Mother's Day, starting this Sunday," Ms Palaszczuk said. Latest information from Queensland Health. Dr Young said the 50-kilometre limit on travel would also be lifted "if you're visiting another household". "But you can't go outinto that community. You can only goto that residence, visit there, andleave," Dr Young said.  Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "You can't go shopping, you can't go to the beach." Dr Young said there were two new cases of COVID-19 confirmed overnight, and that 4,665 Queenslander had been tested in the past 24 hours. Both new cases were on the Gold Coast, one of them linked to a cruise ship. Dr Young said Queensland only had 50 active cases, eight of whom were in hospital. She said despite a "few little breakouts" with the first easing of restrictions last weekend, people were getting the message. "All of these things are dependent on people hearing the message and continuing to do the great job they've done," Dr Young said. "If all of a sudden we end up with a lot of problems or a lot of cases, then we'd have to rethink, but I expect that won't happen. "This is all part of our strategy to get society, as much as possible, back to as much as it can do. "It won't be where we were pre-COVID, that won't happen for quite a while down the track, but we'll gradually see things moving back towards normal business". The Premier was due to meet with representatives from the hospitality industry on Thursday.  But she said a decision about reopening cafes, bars, restaurants and clubs would depend on advice from Friday's National Cabinet meeting. 
Nobel Prize winner 'greatly saddened' his name used to spread COVID-19 misinformation
As the world grapples with an unprecedented health crisis, it is now more important than ever to ensure that the information we share is accurate and fact-based. Fake news and misinformation seem to be spreading as fast and as far as the virus itself, infecting our newsfeeds and timelines at this crucial moment. For this reason, RMIT ABC Fact Check has launched CoronaCheck, an email newsletter in which we will bring you the latest in fact-checking from around the world in relation to the coronavirus. You can read the latest edition below, and subscribe to have the next newsletter delivered straight to your inbox. Manyreaders have asked usaboutcommentssupposedlymade byNobel laureate Tasuku Honjo. We begin today's editionby setting the record straight on ProfessorHonjo'sstance on the source of the novel coronavirus. We've also turned our attention to Madagascar, where the country's president has been spruiking a herbal tea, and to France, where protective gowns that disintegrated when usedhad apparently been importedfrom China. Social media posts claiming that Nobel laureate Tasuku Honjo said the novel coronavirus was "not natural" and "manufactured in China" are false, according to fact checkers at AAP, AFP and Snopes. The posts quote Professor Honjo, who won the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine in 2018, as saying that the virus could not be natural, as it spreads in both hot and cold climates. "I have done 40 years of research on animals and viruses. It is not natural. It is manufactured and the virus is completely artificial," the posts allege Professor Honjo said. Fact checkers at AFP were unable to find any record of Professor Honjo making the attributed remarks, and the professor himself issued a statement saying he was "greatly saddened that my name and that of Kyoto University have been used to spread false accusations and misinformation". In Madagascar, the spread of coronavirus misinformation has not been confined to social media: even the country's leader is spruiking an unproven herbal remedy. According to the BBC, President Andry Rajoelina officially launched the herbal tea by claiming it had already cured two people in the country, prompting people to queue for their supply of the free beverage. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "This herbal tea gives results in seven days," Mr Rajoelina said. But the World Health Organisation told the BBC it did not recommend "self-medication with any medicines ... as a prevention or cure for COVID-19". According to a report in the Bangkok Times, authored by AFP, The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention noted: "There is no scientific evidence that any of these alternative remedies can prevent or cure the illness caused by COVID-19. In fact, some of them may not be safe to consume." With advice on when and where to wear a face mask varying widely, efforts to curb confusion are being further hindered by the spread online of misinformation about protective face coverings. One such example can be seen in a Facebook post, shared in a number of languages, purporting to show the effectiveness of face masks when worn by healthy and infected people, or a combination of both. The infographic claims a healthy person wearing a mask has a 70 per cent chance of being infected with the coronavirus by a sick person not wearing a mask. When mask-wearing is reversed, the apparent "contagion probability" falls to 5 per cent. When both healthy and sick people are fitted with masks, the chance of the healthy person of being infected is supposedly just 1 per cent. Fact checkers at Snopes and Reuters found that the information was mostly false, as there was no scientific consensus of the efficacy of face masks nor data to support the quoted percentages. It was also unclear whether the post referred to surgical masks, homemade masks or N95 respirator masks. However, as reported by Snopes, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention say that masks provided a way of "strengthening the social distancing that we are already doing". Fact checkers at Full Fact and factcheck.org have debunked a post shared on Facebook that falsely suggests a vaccine exists for the novel coronavirus. In the post, a caption accompanying the photo of a vaccine vial states: "Now this was 200 tell me why 19 years later they say there is no vaccine." However, the label on the vial clearly states "canine coronavirus vaccine". As is well known by now, coronaviruses are a family of viruses. The current outbreak relates to the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, which causes COVID-19. According to Full Fact, the vaccine shown in the photo is used to protect dogs from the canine coronavirus.  "Canine coronavirus doesnt affect people, and is a gastrointestinal disease, not a respiratory one," Full Fact explained. A video showing brand new medical gowns disintegrating in France has been shared with a misleading caption suggesting the faulty gear was made in China, AFP Fact Check has found. One version of the video, shared on Twitter and retweeted more than 250 times, is captioned: "Protect our doctors & nurses by not buying medical supplies from bloody #China!" But the hospital featured in the video told AFP that the gowns were not made in China. Rather, they were French-made gowns that had been damaged while in storage. "Apparently, the boxes were stored in a humid place, which damaged the overcoats inside," a spokesperson said. US President Donald Trump's recent claim that the US had done more testing for COVID-19 than "every country combined" has been rubished by fact checkers at factcheck.org. When Mr Trump made the claim on April 28, the US had carried out almost 6.03 million tests for the disease, more than any other country but not more than all other countries combined.  According to factcheck.org, more than 25 million tests had been administered outside the US. "So, [Mr] Trumps claim is not even close to being accurate," factcheck.org concluded. Meanwhile, the top US official in charge of testing, Admiral Brett Giroir, said that conducting 5 million COVID-19 tests per day was not feasible with the current technology. "There is absolutely no way on Earth, on this planet or any other planet, that we can do 20 million tests a day, or even five million tests a day," Time magazine reported the testing czar as saying. In its 56-page "roadmap" for a return to normalcy, a Harvard University study had suggested the US would need to conduct at least 5 million tests a day by early June, and 20 million per day by late July, something Giroir claimed was "an Ivory Tower, unreasonable benchmark". Got a fact that needs checking? Tweet us@ABCFactCheckor send us an email atfactcheck@rmit.edu.au 
Coronavirus testing in NSW reaches new record, Gladys Berejiklian warns restrictions to stay for Mother's Day
NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian has warned the state's social-distancing shutdown will not be eased again before Mother's Day. Two of the new cases were at Newmarch House in Western Sydney The national cabinet will meet tomorrow and discuss relaxing restrictions, but Ms Berejiklian said: "I doubt that NSW will be in a position to implement anything before Mother's Day." While the national guidelines for coronavirus social-distancing could be changed tomorrow, Ms Berejiklian said NSW was "very different" to smaller states. "It's important for each state to work within those national guidelines and do what they think is within their state's interests," she said. The Premier said NSW already eased several restrictions this month and needed time to observe the "cumulative" effects of those changes. "We don't want to have a spike in cases that exceeds what we can manage," she said. "The reason we've adopted that approach is to make sure we get back to normal as soon as possible. "I suspect by the end of June, life will feel much more normal than it does now and even during May, life will feel much more normal." The Premier said two adults and their dependent children could visit a household on Mother's Day and several visits could be scheduled across a day. She also pointed to the fact that unlike Queensland and WA, NSW did not have a limit on travel distances and people in Sydney were permitted to make essential visits to regional areas. She said the "greatest gift" for mothers was for children to return to school next week. Health authorities in Australia's worst-affected coronavirus state also confirmed three new infections yesterday. NSW Health revealed a record 10,902 people had been tested for the virus in the 24 hours to 8:00pm. Two of the new infections were staff at Newmarch House in Western Sydney, which could have its licence revoked in light of its climbing death toll. Newmarch House this afternoon confirmed another staff member had tested positive in addition to the two cases announced this morning. Yesterday, Australia's Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission ordered the nursing home's operator, Anglicare, to appoint an external advisor to ensure it was meeting its regulatory obligations. Anglicare today appointed Andrew Kinkade to take on the role for three months. Mr Kinkade has extensive experience in aged care in Australia and the UK and has been contributing to sector-wide preparations and responses to COVID-19. There have been 16 COVID-19 deaths at Newmarch House. 
Queensland tourism operators say trans-Tasman bubble needed 'yesterday' for COVID-19 recovery
Several major Queensland tourism operators say talk of a 'trans-Tasman bubble' has given them a glimmer of hope that they will be able to get up and running and on the road to recovery. New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern attended Australia's national cabinet meeting on Tuesday with Scott Morrison, discussing the possibility of establishing the travel safe zone. While both leaders admitted it was "some time away", Queensland Tourism Industry Council's Daniel Gswind said it marked an important step in the industry's revival. "We want to make sure every step is taken to accelerate the pace of the state reopening," he said. "The tourism industry employs between 230,000 to 240,000 people and we're quite confident that at least 25 to 30 per cent of those jobs have been lost or suspended. "It is very tough for many and we are hanging on by our fingernails in most cases, so to see some revenue come back is absolutely critically important. "We've gone through a few pain thresholds already and I don't think there is much more the tourism operators can sustain. We've actually gone past a point of pain." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Visitors from New Zealand are becoming an increasingly large part of Queensland's tourism market, particularly for regional hotspots like the Sunshine, the Gold Coast, and the Fraser Coast. Last year New Zealand tourists contributed $600 million to the state's economy. Visit Sunshine Coast chief executive, Simon Latchford, said New Zealand visitors last year accounted for almost a quarter of all tourism dollars, and flights to the neighbouring country were set to expand before the pandemic. "New Zealand has always been, and will continue to be, an extraordinarily important market to us," he said. Mr Latchford said travel between Australia and New Zealand could not resume soon enough for struggling operators. "I don't want to speculate on when this will happen but  yesterday would be great, because clearly we need as much leisure and business action going as quickly as we possibly can," he said. Queensland Airports chief executive, Chris Mills, said the idea of international travel recommencing was providing a small amount of hope to struggling tourism industries.  "I think the sentiment was great. [New Zealand] is such a big market for the Gold Coast," he said. "From our perspective as soon as it's safe to open it up we want to see it fast tracked." The Sunshine State's borders have been closed for more than a month with no date set for them to reopen. Mr Gswind said while international and interstate travel was a vital part of Queensland's tourism market, recommencing travel within the state itself was also essential to the industry's recovery.  "We want to see overnight stays as well becoming a possibility," he said. "The Premier hasn't set a date [for when travel within Queensland will be permitted], but she has indicated that a bit more will be possible by the school holidays in June and we will be able to take advantage of what we have on our doorstep." Regional areas are concerned that even if the trans-Tasman bubble goes ahead, and borders reopen, hard-to-reach locations that most visitors would usually fly to will miss out all together with domestic airlines struggling to remain viable. "Our key priority is having flights that come in," Tourism Whitsunday chief executive Tash Wheeler said. "We are a regional area. Getting dispersal out of cities relies heavily on access and flights and we're looking at ways we can partner with trains and buses. "Access is going to be vital to our success." Mr Gswind said there may also be an upside for regional tourism following the pandemic. He anticipated COVID-19 could pave the way for a boost in sustainable tourism in regional Queensland as more people sought wide open spaces to maintain social distancing while travelling. "I think there is this demand for open space," he said. "Back to nature, back to family, and being together with friends  all of those aspects will contribute to a slightly different tourism future. "We are in a good position to meet the changing expectations of consumers post this COVID-19 crisis and I think we do have to turn the crisis into an opportunity." 
Poland delays presidential election after coronavirus, then protests, threw process into disarray
Poland's ruling party leader and a partner in the governing coalition announced an agreement late on Wednesday to postpone Sunday's presidential election, saying a new date will be chosen later. Jaroslaw Kaczynski, head of the ruling Law and Justice party, and Jaroslaw Gowin, leader of a small party in the conservative coalition, called their decision "a solution that will guarantee Poles the opportunity to participate in democratic elections". The May 10 date was set months ago, but the coronavirus pandemic and a government-ordered lockdown threw preparations for Sunday's election into disarray.  Bitter fighting between the conservative governing party and its political opponents kept them from agreeing on an alternative date.   Instead, the ruling party had sought to maintain the election schedule by making it a postal vote. But a disagreement between Kaczynski and Gowin had created a stalemate that had threatened to cause a larger political crisis. Their agreement suggests the crisis has been averted for now. Many in Poland voiced concerns that a postal vote organised on short notice might not be conducted property or even fairly. Nine former Polish prime ministers and presidents urged voters last month to boycott the ballot, claiming it could be unconstitutional. The group included Lech Walesa, who helped overthrow communism as head of the Solidarity trade union movement. Opinion polls at the end of April showed fewer than 30 per cent of Poles were likely to vote. AP/Reuters 
Working from home from parents' cattle station for London events planner Ali Lord
When the coronavirus pandemic began, Ali Lord decided the best place to be was her parents' cattle station in North Queensland. The London-based events planner packed up her laptop and made the 17-day commute  including a 14-day quarantine period  to the other side of the world. She is now working remotely for the foreseeable future. "I left London because my new visa got held up due to coronavirus, which meant that I couldn't work in London until that came through," Ms Lord said. "That time period is looking like two to three months." With more than 32,000 deaths due to COVID-19, the United Kingdom is one of Europe's worst impacted countries. "Being in lockdown in London wasn't too appealing," she said. "You're talking a small two-storey flat and you're allowed outside for 30 minutes a day for your exercise. "Seeing a city like London, to see streets empty, to see the CBD completely bare is something I hope I've never got to see again in my lifetime." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. After spending two weeks in quarantine at a hotel in Sydney, Ms Lord set up her office on Sutherland Station, near Richmond. Her skills have been put to good use on both sides of the world, with the 14 station staff unable to leave and the rodeos and horse races in the area cancelled. "North Queensland has a great reputation for having an incredibly fun social period," she said. "It's really important for our team here that we do have those social moments and it's not just about long days of work." Together with her mother, Kacie, Ms Lord has been running quiz nights and tennis tournaments with the staff, who all live together. "I come up with the ideas and she just puts them into action," Kacie Lord said. "Everybody jumps on board and helps with the cooking or rolling the tennis court." Kacie Lord is also the president of the local Richmond Field Days, a three-day event that has been cancelled due to the pandemic. "It's the biggest event in the Richmond district and it's an iconic event for the whole of the north," she said. "This event's been going for 35 years and nothing has ever stopped it before  no floods, no droughts." Ms Lord was hoping to bring the event back to its former glory next year. "This is my third year doing it and I'm just finding my feet," she said. By that time, Ali Lord is hoping to be back working with her colleagues in London. "I've got a few obstacles to overcome," she said. "But hopefully I'll go back to London for a year or two and then we'll see what happens." 
Coronavirus Care Army raises alarm after 80yo woman falls and breaks hip, trapped in house for days
An 80-year-old woman who fell and broke her hip  stuck alone on the floor of her home for days  has been rescued by police after a member of Queensland's newly-formed coronavirus Care Army raised the alarm. Erika Freingruber feared she was going to die alone in her Beaudesert house, south of Brisbane, and believes she blacked out during parts of the ordeal. Police bodycam footage captured the moment officers kicked down her door after hearing Ms Freingruber calling for help. "I fell down," she told police officers once they were inside. Constable Max Gillet and Constable Glenn Engels offered Ms Freingruber apple juice as she was lying on the floor with a pillow under her head. Ms Freingruber is recovering in hospital after the fall late last month and was visited by her rescuers,who came with flowers in hand. "You're my lifesavers, my angels, not policemen, my angels," she told them.  "Can you imagine a week, nearly a week lying there, without help day and night? "Every doctor who came here said, 'You don't know how lucky you are that you are alive'. "If you wouldn't have come, I don't think I'd be sitting here." MsFreingruber believes she broke her hip when she stepped out of bed in the morning. She cannot remember exactly how long she was there but it was up to five days. "I don't know what happened, I must have fallen unconscious because there's some time I cannot account for." Constable Engels said welfare checks quite often don't end well and he was relieved to hear Ms Freingruber yell out for help. "To hear her call out was gold for us, we knew we were in a good position," he said. He hoped the story of her rescue inspires more people to sign up to be part of the Care Army. "And hopefully save more lives," he said. Concerns about Ms Freingruber were first raised by Care Army worker Paul Mahoney. The new organisation was set up by the State Government to help monitor the elderly and vulnerable during the pandemic. Mr Mahoney said he was worried after not hearing back from her in several days. "I had some concerns because when I spoke to Erika a few days before hand she had really been on the ball," he said. "We'd also had people talk to her  about fall alarms and possibly about her getting one. "She wanted a few days to think over it and when I [returned to work after two days off], I didn't find any notes that had been made about it, so I really was worried," he said. "It rang alarm bells because she'd been so mentally alert that I was worried this was out of the ordinary for her. "I rang her and couldn't contact her and then I also contacted her friend who had not been able to contact her either, so that's when I rang the police." Kate Jones, Minister in charge of the Care Army, thanked volunteers for helping. More than 28,000 volunteers have registered, receiving more than 13,000 calls for help. "When you contrast those images with the images that we've seen of the elderly in places like Italy, Spain and America, it just shows you this is Queensland's story and that Queensland cares," she said. "There would be people in our community that don't have that support and that is what the Care Army is all about." 
Meghan Markle, Duchess of Sussex, reads to son Archie to promote Save the Children UK coronavirus campaign
The Duke and Duchess of Sussex have thrown their celebrity power behind a campaign to bring food and learning resources to children and families struggling during the COVID-19 pandemic. A three-minute video was posted to the Instagram accounts of Save With Stories and Save the Children UK on Wednesday showing former US actor Meghan Markle reading a book to her son Archie Mountbatten-Windsor. The video showed Meghan sitting with Archie, who turned one the same day, on her lap and reading one of his favourite books, Duck! Rabbit!. Archie grabs at the pages and helps turn them during the reading.  Dad Harry, who filmed the short video, whoops and says "bravo" from behind the camera at the end. Save the Children UK has called for a Family Rescue Package to ensure families have the support they need during the coronavirus crisis. The charity wants bigger tax benefits and more relaxed restrictions around jobseeker payments for those with children. Archie's parents chose not to pose with their newborn outside London's Portland Hospital when he was born and decided against giving the baby a royal name. He accompanied his parents on a tour of Africa at the age of four months and was introduced to Archbishop Desmond Tutu, a Nobel Peace Prize winner. Harry and Meghan shocked many early this year with an announcement they intended to quit as senior royals and split their time between Britain and North America. The couple officially stepped down from royal duties at the end of March, saying they were giving up public funding and seeking financial independence. The family went from living in a cottage on the grounds of Windsor Castle, to Vancouver Island in Canada and then on to Los Angeles before lockdown measures commenced. AP 
Maiden voyage for Australian Cattle Enterprises, Australia's newest live-exporter
A new player has emerged in Australia's live-export industry, with Australian Cattle Enterprises (ACE) today loading its maiden voyage out of the Townsville Port. The Darwin-based company might be new, but its founder and managing director Patrick Underwood, is a well-known name in the northern cattle industry and is the former general manager of exporting company, NACC. Speaking to ABC Rural as 4,500 steers and bulls were being prepared for ACE's first consignment to Vietnam, Mr Underwood said it was "a really proud moment". "I've been in the industry for a long time and [starting a company like this] is quite an onerous task, but this is the first shipment for ACE, a new venture, which started as a back-grounding business in northern Australia. "So it's been a big task, but I've had a lot of support from the wider industry and from the Australian government." Mr Underwood said like many businesses, the coronavirus pandemic had caused some "nervous moments" for the new company. "This ship was originally going on April 30, so we delayed it a week at the request of the importer [who was experiencing] slower sales and a two-week lock down in Vietnam. "We understand how important it is to get this right and comply with the regulations in place, both in Australia and overseas," He said finding staff to work on boats during the pandemic had been challenging for the entire live-export trade, but he was happy to have secured a workforce that included respected Australian vet, Dr Ross Ainsworth. "Dr Ainsworth is one of the most experienced vets in the industry and he has undertaken a 14-day self-isolation in Townsville to be allowed on the vessel," he said.  The cattle have all been sourced from Queensland and are being exported to Vietnam's largest importer of Australian livestock, Hoa Phat. The company has two shipments in May and another two planned for June and, according to Mr Underwood, the third shipment due out of Darwin would have buffalo on board as well. "We'll be operating out of northern Australia and we're starting with Vietnam, but we hope to be selling cattle to Indonesia and Malaysia," Mr Underwood said.  
Mount Isa doctor says regional north-west Queensland is waiting for private flu vaccines to arrive
A Mount Isa doctor is reporting supply issues obtaining influenza vaccines this year amidst a rise in demand due to COVID-19, but health authorities are denying a problem. Dr Michael Mbaogu from the Mount Isa Medical Centre said he has seen a "huge increase" in patients presenting for the flu vaccine.  The funded vaccine is available for anyone aged six months to five years, anyone over 65, pregnant women, Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander patients, and people with chronic medical conditions.  "The trouble is that the non-government funding flu vaccines for people nt in the above categories are scarce," Dr Mbaogu said.  Health Minister Steven Miles said this morning that he was aware of "sporadic" shortages in some regional areas.  He said anyone concerned should contact their pharmacist or doctor and ask to be informed when supplies arrive. Mount Isa pharmacist, Vashti Dobson, said she had been told not to expect vaccinations to be delivered before the end of June. "We have tried to order extra vaccines from our supplier, and basically there is a significant delay in receiving those," she said.  "Pre-orders were placed in November and we ordered based on how many people we vaccinated last year, then once there was an increased demand we tried to order additional vaccines in March. "At this stage we're still waiting on 160 vaccines." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Ms Dobson, who is the pharmacist in charge for two local pharmacies, said she does not think the 160 vaccines will fill the demand. "I would say that with the number of calls we're getting, not it won't be enough," she said.  "I think that because of the big media attention around getting a flu shot and the coronavirus situation, that people are concerned that they won't get their vaccination." Australian Medical Association (AMA) North Queensland Representative, Michael Clements, said Queensland Health was doing its best.  "I really can't fault Queensland Health to be honest, remembering that we place our orders for these flu vaccines," Dr Clements said.  "These orders were placed last year, there's only so much that we can do  we could have tempered the health message a little bit, saying 'get your flu vaccine as soon as you can' as opposed to saying 'you need to get it  get it now'." Dr Clements, who works in Karumba every month, said the private flu vaccines were a supply issue not a national shortage. "One of the other things that is effecting demand at the moment is we've seen a lot of companies  making the flu vaccine compulsory," he said. "That's actually adding to the demand for the private flu vaccine stock."  A Queensland Health spokesperson said there had been no issue delivering the government-funded vaccine under the National Immunisation Program to Mount Isa. As of May 6, more than 1.3 million doses of the NIP vaccine have been distributed across Queensland. The spokesperson said all other flu vaccines other than that government-funded program were supplies by private market, not Queensland Health.  "Queensland Health does not have oversight of the supply or availability of influenza vaccine in the private market," the spokesperson said. "However, we are aware that the Australian Government has sourced additional supplies of influenza vaccine, which is anticipated to be available in the private market from June 2020. "There have been no issues with delivering government funded National Immunisation Program influenza vaccine to Mt Isa.  "However, due to limited commercial transportation options, Queensland Health has experienced some difficulty in delivering government funded vaccines to the communities of Burketown and Karumba." 
Why South Australia could lead the nation in economic recovery from coronavirus
South Australia has only recorded one new case of coronavirus in the past fortnight, and the state could be in the box seat to win the race to recovery. There's no denying the global pandemic will have ongoing health implications, especially before a vaccine is developed, but many are predicting the financial implications will last for many years. Just last week, South Australian Treasurer Rob Lucas said he was "horrified" at the inevitable debt the state would accrue over coming years, largely due to spending on coronavirus measures. South Australia is not alone: every state and territory has had increased spending on infrastructure and economic measures to keep people in jobs or subsidise wages for those who have lost work. Some states are expected to suffer more than others, but the news for South Australia has a silver lining. This is largely due to the fact that South Australia doesn't rely as heavily on the industries that are going to be hardest hit. Independent economist Saul Eslake said South Australia's potentially strong position was a "backhanded compliment" for the state  but something it should also attempt to capitalise on. Nationally, Australia saw a gross domestic product rate increase of 2.89 per cent in 2018-19, but South Australia's annual growth rate for the same year was only 1.34 per cent. Usually, having a lower growth rate isn't something to brag about  but, ironically, it could now be the very reason that South Australia might bounce back quicker. "Australia's record-breaking run of economic growth largely owed an awful lot to three things," Mr Eslake said. "Number one, rapid population growth fuelled by immigration. Number two, piggybacking on China's rapid economic growth, industrialisation, and urbanisation. "And three, the housing boom. "One of the reasons why South Australia lagged [behind] the rest of the country over this period was that it derived less benefit from each of these three things." In other words, South Australia's slower economic growth means the state was starting from a lower base, so it didn't have as far to fall. The housing market is likely to be one of the sectors that is hit the hardest, along with tourism. However, South Australia's property market is traditionally more stable than the market in most other states  which could be a significant factor in it bouncing back. "We are in a better position than other states. Our market is less reliant on foreign investment, it's less reliant on investor activity," said Andrew Shields, interim general manager of the Real Estate Institute of SA. "We've also come off two very good quarters of performance in the real estate market so that's definitely positioning us for a good recovery. "Being a conservative market puts us in a much stronger position." While the number of new listings has inevitably declined, the hit has been nowhere near as devastating as initially feared. "We're seeing an average of about 10 per cent drop-off in listing activity, which is far less than what we were predicting," Mr Shields said. While those to the east, and even the west at times, boast of surges in house prices, South Australians usually see much more modest increases. It is for that reason that the SA market may be less vulnerable to the long-term impacts of COVID-19. "Between the election last year and February this year, Sydney and Melbourne in particular saw some quite big price gains," Mr Eslake said. "With worries about negative gearing out of the way and interest rates being cut again, they had a rebound in the property markets." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. But now, those gains are expected to be all but lost, with many homeowners and investors choosing to defer loan repayments as a way of making ends meet.  "When that expires at the end of September, we'll face higher or longer repayments because the banks aren't foregoing the interest, they're just deferring and capitalising it," Mr Eslake said. "And there'll be some people who've done that, who won't have jobs to go back to, and they may be forced to sell or may choose to sell.  "I don't think [South Australia] will have as many households in financial distress." The South Australian tourism industry has been dealt a double blow this year with the summer bushfires impacting two of its most popular destinations  the Adelaide Hills and Kangaroo Island. It will now take the industry even longer to recover, as travel restrictions due to coronavirus are expected to remain in place for months to come. But if there is a positive for South Australian regions it is that the state's share of international tourists has been much lower than its share of domestic tourists. Like the argument that the state's property sector may bounce back quicker, this means the travel industry may recover sooner too. Australian Bureau of Statistics data shows the number of short-term overseas visitors arriving in South Australia in 2018-19 represented only 3 per cent of the national total. It doesn't mean the state had less tourism  in fact, the figures show the percentage of employment and economic activity resulting from the tourism industry in South Australia is on par with the national average. It just means the tourism figures are largely driven by domestic visitors. "Because you're not as dependent on international tourism, the fact that that's going to take a lot longer to recover is less of a drag on South Australia than it will be for most other states," Mr Eslake said. All of this is not to say the coming months and years of recovery will be easy. But the difficult path to recovery may be made slightly less difficult for South Australia, given its hidden strengths. 
Canberra Raiders trio join Bryce Cartwright in refusing flu vaccines, jeopardising NRL restart date
The Canberra Raiders will today seek an exemption from the NRL to allow three players to return to training, despite their refusal to get the flu shot. Raiders forwards Sia Soliola, Joe Tapine and Josh Papalii were told to stay away from training yesterday after they refused to sign an unmodified version of the vaccination waiver. Instead they crossed out the line "that they are at greater risk of getting the flu if they are not vaccinated". It is understood the trio protested the policy on cultural grounds. Players agreeing to get the flu jab is part of the NRL's strict biosecurity protocols that were put in place to allow the competition to restart on May 28. The move by the trio mirrors that of Gold Coast forward Bryce Cartwright, who is also believed to have crossed out the line on the waiver. Prime Minister Scott Morrison yesterday said a "no jab, no play" policy should apply to the NRL. However, Cartwright said in a social media post that he would not be forced into getting a flu jab. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "I won't be bullied into making decisions that could impact my health and the health of my family," he posted on social media. "Giving us the ultimatum of get the shot or be stood down is coercion and leaking private medical information is illegal. "As for me being the first and apparently only one declining the shot is b******t and far from the truth." An NRL spokesperson said players who refused to receive the shot would be dealt with on a case-by-case basis in consultation with club and NRL medical staff. A Rugby League Players' Association (RLPA) spokesman said a player who refused to be vaccinated had the option to sign a waiver so they could continue to train and be available for selection while their case was dealt with by the NRL. The spokesman said the RLPA strongly recommended flu shots but believed players who refused should be dealt with case-by-case and that the vaccination was not mandatory. Cartwright added that he was not an anti-vaxxer. "I stand for the freedom to choose what goes into our bodies  so to label me an 'anti-vaxxer' is spreading misinformation," he said. Cartwright's wife Shanelle posted on social media saying her children were a "picture of health" and that the couple was "not anti anything". Titans winger Dale Copley, who is also the RLPA player director, insisted that whether a player got the flu vaccine or not should be a personal choice. "He [Cartwright] is well and truly able to have the freedom to decide what goes in his body and what doesn't," he said. The Raiders will seek the exemption until the governing body finalises its position. 
Carnival cruises began dealing with coronavirus in January. Here's how the company handled the Ruby Princess in March
As Ros Torrance smiled at the camera on the balcony of her luxury suite aboard the Ruby Princess, she had an inkling something wasn't quite right.  The $600 million cruise ship ticked all the boxes for Ms Torrance and her husband's holiday: a dozen restaurants, casino, bars, pools, mini-golf, a theatre and live entertainment every night.  It was late February and COVID-19 was still weeks away from being declared a pandemic but, as the cruise went on, she started to worry. "Everyone was talking about it. My husband and I were very careful," she said. The couple dined only in the exclusive Club Class dining room. "We didn't go to the buffet to eat," she said.  Ms Torrance was lucky: she was on the ship weeks before the infamous Ruby Princess cruise that has become the single largest source of COVID-19 infections in Australia.  In the final days of her trip, she thought it was unusual to hear announcements asking passengers with a fever to come to the medical centre. "Then they made an announcement that the New South Wales health authorities would not be letting us off when we docked," she said. "They would be coming on board and seeing people that were unwell and that nobody would be disembarking until they were happy," she said. Why New South Wales Health officials boarded that ship to check passengers but allowed thousands of passengers off the next Ruby Princess cruise is just one of the questions now being examined by a Special Commission of Inquiry.  As Ms Torrance waited to disembark on March 8, she noticed the ship was being cleaned. "I was immediately assailed by this incredible smell of disinfectant  we could see the next lot of passengers waiting to get on" she said. Tracey Temple and her mother were standing on the wharf below waiting to board. Their cruise had been delayed for hours and gossip was spreading fast that NSW Health was on board. "I heard that they were fumigating," Ms Temple said.  "I panicked and went and tried to find somebody from the cruise ship." Alarmed, she found a crew member. "I said to her, 'I would like to ask you a question. I am a kidney and pancreas transplant patient. I want to know if it's safe for myself and my mother to get onto this cruise?' "She said that the cruise ship would not let one passenger, let alone all passengers, be put at risk if it wasn't safe to sail," Ms Temple said. Ms Temple and her mother would soon join the hundreds of passengers on other Princess-branded ships who became infected with COVID-19. "I nearly lost my life and my transplant as well, because of somebody's neglect, somebody's stupidity, and the lies, just the lies that they told. "As far as I'm concerned, they put the mighty dollar first and they never put our safety first." Just five weeks before the Ruby Princess embarked on its ill-fated journey, its sister ship the Diamond Princess found itself at the centre of a major deadly outbreak. In late January, the ship sailed from Japan to Hong Kong. A passenger who got off there later tested positive for COVID-19. It took the company nearly two days to tell the 2,666 passengers the news. Melbourne woman Suzanne D'Silva and her family heard the captain announce a previous passenger had tested positive.  They felt assured the situation was under control. "We had no idea what was about to hit us," she said. After the announcement, cruise life continued: packed theatres remained open and guests kept visiting the buffet-style restaurants for meals. Suzanne and her family celebrated a birthday in one of the restaurants that night. The next day, the D'Silva's holiday came to an abrupt halt when the ship docked in Japan. Passengers were told they would be held under quarantine in their rooms for the next 14 days under an order from Japan's Ministry of Health. Japanese Infection Control Specialist Professor Kentaro Iwata boarded the ship to observe the authorities' handling of the outbreak.  He was horrified by what he found. "I don't think there was any strategy. I think the scheme was to contain everybody," Professor Iwata said. "I think the operation at the Diamond Princess was a failure.  "They allowed the spread of the disease inside the cruise ship and they were not being mindful about the fact that many passengers were elderly people who are susceptible to severe diseases." A week after quarantine began, Suzanne D'Silva's daughter was diagnosed with COVID-19. "You're enclosed, you're breathing in this air. The food is coming open. It could be anywhere," she said. "You're hiding from something you don't know and where do you hide?" Three of the four members of the D'Silva family joined more than 700 people on board the Diamond Princess who contracted COVID-19. The company encouraged crew and guests to share images with #princessproud as the quarantine dragged on. Some passengers were confined to windowless cabins, only allowed out once a day to see sunlight. Princess Cruises is part of the world's largest cruise conglomerate, Carnival Corporation, which includes nine brands and over 100 ships in its fleet.  Despite the disaster on board the Diamond Princess, the company was determined to continue sailing. At the end of February, Carnival Corporation's chief medical officer, Dr Grant Tarling, reassured passengers it was safe to cruise. "We've learned a lot from the world's top experts and have stepped up our health protocols even more," he said. "The cruising experience continues to be an exceptional and safe way to travel the world." But less than a week after that message was posted on social media, the company was hit with a second major COVID-19 outbreak. In early March, 21 people aboard the Grand Princess, off the coast of California, tested positive to the virus. The ship was stranded for weeks while authorities scrambled to work out how to manage the outbreak. By March 8, after an hours-long delay, the Ruby Princess set sail from Sydney's Circular Quay on its ill-fated journey. Passengers settled into their holiday, enjoying theatre performances and a Rod Stewart impersonator and dining in the dozen restaurants on board. Ms Temple remembers the mood on board shifting four days into the trip. "We were watching the news and we didn't know until we were on the ship that it had been classed as a pandemic. Then of course, you panic and you think, 'Oh my God, you know, there's no way you can get off'." Princess Cruises announced it would halt all new cruises for the next 60 days. In a video announcement, president Jan Swartz posed the question on everyone's mind. "We've been asked and we've asked ourselves, why COVID-19 seems to be impacting Princess so heavily  We don't really know," she said. Things were about to get worse.  As the Ruby Princess continued on its journey around New Zealand, some on board began to fall ill. Ms Temple and her mother were among them.  It was nothing serious, they thought; just a dry cough and upset stomach. "I wouldn't go to the doctor because they charge you like a wounded bull. I just put it down to a transplant thing, I didn't ever have it cross my mind that it was COVID-19." On March 14, the ship docked in Napier and passengers spread across the town, visiting shops and taking bus tours. Some 24 locals would later test positive for the virus. The Ruby Princess couldn't test for COVID-19 on board but doctors could take viral swabs for processing on shore.  When the ship docked in Wellington the next day, five samples were tested for the virus. All came back negative. In mid-March, the New Zealand and Australian governments announced a ban on all incoming cruise ships. The Ruby Princess headed back to Sydney early. On the way back, the ship's senior physician, Dr Ilse Von Watzdorf, wrote in an email to NSW Health: "It seems we are in the early stages of an influenza A outbreak." But the message being delivered to concerned passengers was very different. "They just kept reassuring you all the time, 'this ship is virus-free'." Ms Temple said.  "The steward that comes and cleans your room. He kept saying 'no, we're clear. This ship is good, we are free. We don't have to worry.'" The Ruby Princess was required to send logs with the number of sick passengers to Federal authorities. The first report showed 53 people were sick and 10 had a temperature. Over the next two days, those numbers more than doubled. NSW Health also wrote to the ship, requesting further information about sick passengers. On the morning of March 18, the ship's doctor reported 104 people had presented to the medical centre with "acute respiratory illness" but only 36 guests, or 0.94 per cent of those on board, had "influenza-like illness". It was this figure, of just less than 1 per cent, that led NSW Health to classify the ship as "low-risk". But the department knew some passengers were in isolation and had been swabbed for COVID 19. What NSW Health didn't know was that the number of sick people on board had continued to climb. The ship's doctor later told the Ruby Princess Inquiry that she was very busy and had forgotten to send through the details of more unwell passengers and crew who had come forward later that day. On the ship's final night at sea, passengers mingled on board, oblivious to the risk posed by the virus. The ship's atrium was filled with passengers for a farewell party. Shortly afterwards, on shore in Sydney, a Carnival Australia Port Agent called 000 to request an ambulance for two passengers on board. She told the operator staff would need to wear protective gear because both had "been tested for coronavirus". That information triggered a late-night decision by the NSW Port Authority to deny the ship pilotage. An hour later, that decision was overturned after the head of the Port Authority spoke to a senior manager at Carnival Australia. He reassured her that the ambulances were not called for COVID-19 reasons and that NSW Health had determined the ship was low-risk. At 2:30am, the Ruby Princess docked in Sydney Harbour and the two ill passengers were rushed to the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital.  A Carnival staffer handed 13 COVID-19 swabs to a pathology courier. Three, including the two taken by ambulance to hospital, would later test positive for the virus. On board the ship on the night of March 18, passengers slept, unaware of the drama unfolding around them. Passengers disembarked early that morning. American Travel Agent Diane Fish led a tour group of 10 people off the cruise.  "It was a long line of crew members with their hands up," she said. "So you're doing this high-five all the way down the ship and I'm thinking, "Oh, my God. I just touched 50 people". When she returned to Miami, Ms Fish tested positive to COVID-19 along with 6 out of her 10-person tour group. "We felt safer on the ship. I mean, we thought we were going to go into the problem. We didn't realise we were going to be the problem," she said. At least 850 passengers and crew have contracted COVID-19 and 24 people are dead. A Special Commission of Inquiry and a police investigation are now trying to get the bottom of who is responsible. Ms Temple blames Princess Cruises for not cancelling the trip.  "Yes, NSW health let us disembark the ship, but Princess Cruises put us on the ship to begin with. They should have cancelled the cruise before us to safeguard us. Because they have a duty of care, or supposedly a duty of care to look after their passengers, and they did not," she said.  Princess Cruises senior vice-president for the Asia-Pacific, Stuart Allison, insisted the company had fulfilled all of its requirements under NSW and federal laws. "Even so, our onboard team had taken no chances, they required guests who reported flu-like symptoms to [remain in] cabins," he said in a video released the week after the ship docked. "The medical team was asked to provide swabs. Our guests could disembark because that was the official government process at the time." Regardless of who is to blame, Ms Temple said she will never be getting on a cruise ship again. "My opinion is that they should put it [Ruby Princess] somewhere out in the middle of the ocean and sink it," she said.  
Coronavirus Australia live news: Some students return to schools as coronavirus restrictions ease
Students return to schools in New South Wales, Queensland, Tasmania and the ACT today, as coronavirus restrictions continue to ease across the country. Follow today's events as they unfold.  By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale 
Resources industry creating much-needed jobs in regional Queensland despite coronavirus
North Queensland's resources sector is creating much-needed employment as companies press on with expansions during the coronavirus pandemic. Sun Metals in Townsville is months away from reaching peak construction of its $450 million zinc refinery expansion to increase annual production, mostly into Asian markets. Executive director Kathy Danaher said Sun Metals would have created 350 construction jobs by about October, and 100 ongoing positions as construction finishes in the second quarter of 2021. "We're at the pointy end, we're seeing buildings going up [and] connections within piping," Ms Danaher said. Ravenswood Gold has started hiring the dozens of contractors and 150 permanent employees it needs by mid-2021 as it works to extend the mine's life with a large-scale open pit at Ravenswood, south-west of Townsville. "It'll be better for the state, it'll be better for the community  and generally better for the business," CEO Brett Fletcher said. For years, Townsville's unemployment rate has been above the national and state averages but it had been improving before the pandemic hit. Townsville economist Colin Dwyer said the expansions were timely. "We're creating jobs. They're high-income jobs and  they're going to be spending their money, hopefully, in local businesses," Mr Dwyer said. Mr Dwyer said there were dozens of north Queensland construction projects, in a range of industries, that would start soon or had high confidence in proceeding and were just as important in recovering the economy. For example, 270 construction jobs were expected to be created from November when a technology innovation complex was built at James Cook University. "It's that diversification and the essentialness in the projects that are key for recovery," Mr Dwyer said. "If we simply had one specialised area with all of those projects in it, and let's say it's tourism, we would struggle to recover quicker than other regions. That's quicker, not necessarily quickly." Another Townsville economist, Jonathon Pavetto, agreed, and added a call for more investment. "If we really want the economy [to grow], we really need governments to open the chequebook when it comes to infrastructure," he said. It's a similar story in Central Queensland, where a recent study named Emerald among the least economically vulnerable Australian towns to the impact of coronavirus restrictions. BHP has recently put on 125 apprentices in Mackay and Pembroke has received conditional approval to build a new coking-coal mine in the Bowen Basin. ANZ senior commodities strategist Daniel Hynes said Australia's mining sector had held up relatively well but noted project closures and staff lay-offs for some markets. "Companies are obviously  looking at costs  and that's going to result in new projects coming online a little less frequently than we've seen in the past," Mr Hynes said. He said the expansion of the north Queensland gold and zinc projects made sense. "The [gold sector] has been in very strong demand. The zinc side, there is still a little bit of uncertainty around what the post COVID-19 environment will be like," he said. "While these decisions are based on long-term dynamics, even the shorter-term issues should benefit from demand for these products." 
How Australia's 'fake genuine Russian choir' Dustyesky went viral during the coronavirus pandemic
On the breakwater at the surf beach in Brunswick Heads a group of men are reverently singing a rousing Russian revolutionary song. They are dressed as Russian workers, in cloth caps. There is emotional conviction and Russian passion in this song about solidarity. But, infact,none of these comrades have ever been anywhere near the Motherland, seenawindsweptsteppe, or traversed a frozen tundra. Nor do any of them speak Russian (although they do like a vodka). In his impressive fake Russian accent, master of ceremonies for the choir,Mark Swivel, explains: "Dustyeskyis the leading genuine fake Russian choir in southern hemisphere. "We are 28 men, middle-aged, very hairy, and we all live outside the tiny little hamlet of Mullumbimby or, as we call it,Mullumgrad. "And all of us singing like we know the language and the words." Mullumbimby is asmall,subtropicaltown near Byron Bay in northern New South Wales. A freewheeling place of yoga,marijuana, veggies and decidedly alternative ways of being. Not an easy place, then, to summon the suffering in the songs of the battlefields, the despair of the proletarian worker. But Mark says the songs "pick you up, they make you sing them, they sweep youaway". It all began as a bit of a sing and a few beers at the RSL on Tuesday nights. "They had to come up with these elaborate excuses to leave the house," localwriter andcomedian Mandy Nolan tells Australian Story. "They all live in relationships where they have to co-parent and do half the cooking. You don't just go out to the pub with these dudes, you've got to have an excuse. And a Russian choir,thatsit." But then they accidentally went viral, were picked up by Russian television and are now known to millions of Russian people. The ideacame from "comrade" Glenn Wright, a former co-owner and talent booker for Sydney's Harbourside Brasserie, who moved to Byron Shire and started the Mullum Music Festival. "I've had a longstanding love affair with the music of Russia, the great Russian composers and also the marching army songs," he says.  Glenn wanted a Russian choir for the festival but couldn't afford to fly one out, so he hatched the idea of creating one locally. It was 2:00am at a party when they were drinking vodka that Glenn ran into Andrew Swain, an actualchoirmaster. "That was when he asked me. Well, I was pretty much anybody's at that stage," Andrew says. Singing ability was not a high priority when Andrew put the call out.  "I didn't audition anybody, I do believe that everybody can sing," he says. It was about looking the part. "We looked for hairy people, so hairy men, woolly men, men that you could find at the bar late at night." Mark points out that singing ability is subjective. "I have heard some people say thatDustyeskyhas three type of men: one with excellent voice, two, kind of hold a tune, and three, good to have a drink with. We sing perfectfour-partharmony, even though some of us cannot sing." Getting carried away by the music is the point, Andrew says. "When I'm teaching an amazing song to a bunch of people who aren't accomplished singers and we're also drinking beer, usually at the same time, you know, pretty much anything can happen." Although "comrade" Swivel likes to say all the choir members live in shipping containers, work in a typewriter factory, are salmon smokers and make gherkin liqueur, he is in fact a lawyer. "They're from all walks of life," Andrew says of the men. "They're nut farmers, teachers, plumbers, carpenters, musiciansand builders." From their inaugural gig at the Bangalow Hotel in Byron Shire, competing, Mark says, with "greyhounds on television, people playing on the poker machines, and the men in hi-vis vests drinkingTooheysNew", they knew something special was happening. "Everybody dancing and behaving in quite a silly fashion," he says in his trademark faux Russian accent. Perhaps it was the toasts with Russian vodka to make the performance more culturally appropriate, maybe it was Mark announcing that, "now we look forward to meeting yourwomensandlivestocks", aftertheperformance,but suddenly they were in demand at festivals at a time when they only had three songs. Over time the stages got bigger. Theysangat festivals in Melbourne and Sydney, andfor thousands atAdelaide'sWomadelaideFestival. "You could always spot the Russians in the audience because they were the ones crying or singing along to every verse," Andrew says. The Russian ambassador and his entourage came to see them, the ambassador looking, Mark says,like a Bond villain. TheRussianimpostorswere "terrified", Andrew says, when therealRussians started noticing themand their journalists came to interview them. "We were really nervous about whether they would like us or hate us,"he says. Then "out of the blue"theRussia-1TVnetworkpicked up a clip they had made and played it at the end of every news bulletin. It was possibly the only time the word Mullumbimby had been spoken by a Russian broadcaster. "Suddenly my phone started getting messages from Russia in the middle of the night," Andrew says. They were a hit. Bigtimeski. Then came the call from the Russian Ministry of Culture inviting them to sing in Red Square forthe ImmortalRegiment at theGrand Victory Day Parade on May 9. The full Russian display, "250,000 people and [President Vladimir] Putin and the tanks and all the stuff," Andrew says incredulously. The Russian Government were flying 28 men half-way round the world to sing for fourminutes."Most of men not last that long," jokes Mark as his Russian alter ego. "We give it a crack anyway." However, the COVID-19 pandemicstopped the event and Dustyesky's big trip to the Motherland.  Instead, Russian televisionreporters helped the choir to put a clip together. Filmed on theiriPhones in isolation, the group of Aussie men recorded a beautiful yet tragic song about tanks on the battlefield, and a soldier who will not make it home to his family. The Russia Today TV network edited the clip and broadcast it during the Victory Day telecast. The men of Dustyesky were amazed. "Millions of people have watched it and I've been getting hundreds andhundredsofcomments from Russian people saying, 'you guys are amazing, this is incredible'," Andrew says. "It turns out that Russian people are really generous and are quite forgiving about pretty crappy accents." Mark isn't letting COVID-19 restrictions stop the choir singing. "We are choir born for pandemics, most infectious choir on the planet right now," he says. As Dustyesky's popularity surged, a Russian choir sent back a love letter.TheChoir of Udmurtia in the Volga responded with a rendition of Waltzing Matilda.The respect worked both ways. Markhasalso extended aninvitation tothe Kremlin to come share a brew or two and sing a few songs. "We invite President Putin to come toMullumgrad to hang out in the river together. We take off our shirts and cover ourselves in macadamia butter and see what happens," he says. It has taken a motley choir from Mullumbimby to return ancient folk songs and classic songs that were notoftensung anymore to Russian culture. And still have a drink and a laugh. Dustyeskyis proof you can have Russian soul if you really want to. "The songs of Russia are actually the songs of entire world," Mark says. "That is the lesson, if you want one, ofDustyesky. That there is no particular culture, there is just the song, and it holds all of us within it." Watch Dustyesky on Australian Story, 8:00pm (AEST), ABCTV and iview. 
Queensland students return to school today as coronavirus restrictions ease
As more than 600,000 students from years 2 to 10 return to school, Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk says parents can be reassured that no new coronavirus cases have been recorded in Queensland overnight. "I want to thank all the school communities for getting the schools prepared, all the efforts that have gone in, the cleaning and the COVID safe plans and the rapid response plans are in place if there was to be an outbreak," Ms Palaszczuk said this morning. "All of our students are back at school today, and I know there are lots of students happy to back in the classroom, but also lots of happy parents out there." Latest information from Queensland Health. Maddeline Bailey returned to year 1 two weeks ago, leaving her big sister Charlotte to continue being home schooled by their busy parents at their Morningside home in Brisbane's east. The six-year-old was one of 185,000 littlies and senior students who were allowed to return to classrooms in a post-lockdown easing of restrictions. Today it is Charlotte's turn to return to school. Dad Julian Bailey said it had been a "stressful nine weeks", particularly at the start of the lockdown period, with the last two weeks dragging on a little.  "It has been surreal and hats off to teaching staff at all the schools.  "They have had to split themselves in many more ways than we would in a normal workplace," he said.  Mum Sylvia Vos who had been working as an engineer from home said Charlotte was over the moon about putting an end to digital play dates and being able to see her friends face-to-face. "It has been challenging it has been really interesting to work together as a family unit and we often sit down with the girls and say you know we need to work at this together and there was times we would get cranky and impatient," she said.  Both parents are celebrating their freedom and the daytime peace and quiet in the house from today. "I won't have Skype videos with a child just appearing in the corner at the back somewhere because that has been happening quite a lot, and you say, 'oh hello,'" Ms Vos said.  They plan a coffee catch-up out of the house to mark the post COVID-19 lockdown, and maybe a glass of wine tonight.  "We have been self-medicating a little with wine at night, but now life will get back to normal," she laughed.  At Pullenvale State School in Brisbane's west, year 4 student Amelie Goodsir said she was relieved to get back to school after learning at home. "All my brothers and sisters were annoying me," she said. She was most looking forward to seeing her friends and teachers. Zhenya Kireev dropped off both his kids  Stan in year 2 and Elena in prep this morning. "It's good to have them back at school to study properly," he said. "It [home learning] was on and off, it was OK but I think it's better for them to go back." Fellow Pullenvale parent Claire Brodie said she had mixed emotions about dropping off her two children to prep and year 3 classes. "I've been quiet happy to have them home and being homeschooled, but then it's quite nice that they're going into school and seeing all their friends," she said. "And they've been missing their teachers so they're happy to go." For the Malloy family from Runaway Bay it is a huge weight off their shoulders. They've been in lockdown for over eight weeks, teaching two children at home, while also working from home. Mum Kelly worked for a mental health charity while dad Craig ran his marketing business. From piano lessons to maths, they said it was stressful and a challenge to keep juggling all their commitments. But this morning as they send 11-year-old Zara and nine-year-old Lincoln back to formal lessons they have mixed emotions. "It is quite a strange situation, school itself will be a bit different, it is a drop off and go system so no parent contact," Ms Malloy said. "And it's been hard trying to remember what to do, like we couldn't find their school shoes this morning because they have not worn them for so long. "But it will be nice to get back into a routine as the kids have been missing the structure and their friends.  "So hopefully smooth sailing from here."  Parents are concerned their children will struggle with social distancing rules, but Education Minister Grace Grace said they have no need to worry.  "Students don't require to necessarily be physical distancing or social distancing because of the practically of that," she said. "But obviously, we need to maintain our social distance for adults, for teachers, for parents not to gather around outside the school in carparks, for staff to stagger breaks." Ms Grace said schools were stocked up on cleaning supplies and had been thoroughly cleaned in the lead up to students returning.  School activities like sport would be off limit and there would also be staggered lunch breaks.  Queensland Secondary Schools Principals Association President Mark Breckenridge said his 600 members would be feeling a mix of excitement relief but also a degree of trepidation as they welcome students back.  A recent study found Queensland principals were the most stressed, depressed and burnt out in the nation.  The world pandemic adding to the pressure on them to create a "safe new normal" as kids were welcomed back.  "A lot of schools have pivoted a number of times to adjust to different ways of teaching and learning and this is the next step and hopefully the final step," Mr Breckenridge said.  "I think you have just pinch yourself and think has this really been real. "It has been an incredibly strange and trying year for everyone. "It seems like we finished Christmas and the summer break with the bushfires all around and the emotional toll that had on people and all of a sudden this virus arrives." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Dean of Education at Griffith University Professor Donna Pendergast said it was not surprising some students were anxious going back as "schooling is now so different from when everyone left". "We need to check children feel well supported at school and that their friendship groups have been re-established," she said. She was also urging children to not to think about their grades just yet, because their social and emotional well-being was more important at this stage. Term two will run until late June.  
Eight big issues for vulnerable students highlighted by coronavirus crisis, charity says
She's only six years old, but Sylvana's education has already served up challenges most kids won't even need to think about during their entire school life. When the COVID-19 crisis closed her school, Sylvana was forced to switch to online learning in a home that didn't even have a computer. "We just had Nanny's mobile phone," Sylvana said. For the first three weeks, Sylvana and her grandmother Sylvia  her primary carer  both struggled. "We [were] learning through the mobile phone, which was very difficult at times because you couldn't even read it," Sylvia said. "I'm 63, Sylvana's nearly seven. And I'm thinking, it's been that many years since I've been to school, how am I going to help her?" Sylvia had never asked for help before, but she steeled herself and approached the Smith Family. The charity supplied a laptop and internet connection. "I felt so happy," Sylvana said, before adding with a laugh: "But Nanny opened the box so I was a little bit angry." Even with the laptop it's been a struggle, and Sylvia knows Sylvana has fallen behind. "I think there's going to be a lot of work catching up, because I can only do so much," Sylvia said. The Smith Family, Australia's leading educational charity, has produced a report based on its work helping 700 schools and 50,000 disadvantaged students during the COVID-19 crisis. It's the broadest look yet at the impact of Australia's biggest education experiment in decades  remote learning  and the implications for the futures of many young people. The report identifies eight key areas of concern:  The "digital divide" faced by families without computers or internet, or multiple children sharing one device  Challenges with homeschooling such as the stress of establishing new routines and financial pressures from the cost of stationery, printing, etc  Increased risk of students disengaging altogether  particularly those starting high school this year, or in year 10  Unemployment as many tertiary students lose their jobs  Mental health concerns  Limitations on family life and loss of family supports creating issues with interactions with extended family  Food insecurity and the closure of school breakfast clubs, with one family's weekly food budget increasing from $200 to $350  Delays and difficulty accessing support services A separate report released today by the Centre for Independent Studies (CIS) warns disadvantaged students in NSW, Queensland, Victoria, Tasmania and the ACT will have fallen several weeks behind. Using US data on normal schools compared to online schools, and applying the findings to NAPLAN results in Australia, the think tank estimates those students will have to catch up one to two weeks' lost learning in reading and two to three weeks' in numeracy. "The learning lost due to Australian school closures is not irretrievable, but it does require state and territory governments to assess students on return to school, identify those who have fallen behind, and provide intensive intervention to ensure they catch up with their peers," the CIS report says. Source: Pain without gain: Why school closures are bad policy, Centre for Independent Studies Jasmyn Lloyd is seen as a future Indigenous leader, but the 20-year-old medical student from rural SA is finding it tough just getting by at the moment. She too was supported by the charity in school, and surprised herself by getting the marks she needed to study medicine. She dreams of returning to a small community as a rural GP after she finishes university, but COVID-19 has threatened her hard work. A Smith Family scholarship meant she could buy a laptop to keep up with remote learning, but the pandemic led to the loss of her part-time job and her parents can't assist her financially. "It was a lot of shock horror," she said. "There was a lot of times where I'm like, 'I'm going to have to move back home, I'm going to have to quit uni, I can't afford to stay in the city anymore', and it was getting to the stage where I was almost having to pack my bags." Again, the Smith Family's insights suggest Ms Lloyd's experience is all too common, with tertiary students from disadvantaged backgrounds facing similar challenges to schoolkids. Many have had to deal with changed living arrangements, especially those who had been staying on campus or in student accommodation. Some also did not have access to internet, computers or affordable data, and were reliant on financial help. In addition to appealing for donations to its winter relief program the charity is calling on governments, corporations and the community to help these students. The report says "tackling digital disadvantage" should be a top priority in the pandemic recovery. When coronavirus suddenly tilted the educational playing field, Ryan Hicklin  stuck with just a pre-paid mobile phone  did not have the tools he needed to learn. Then a charity stepped in to help. It calls on telecommunications companies to find ways to offer further help to low-income families, following NBN Co's $150 million COVID-19 relief package. "This could involve discounting retail prices, or the direct provision of data and home internet packages to target groups," the report says. It also calls for technical support helplines for parents and carers who need help with digital proficiency and students' online learning platforms. Smith Family CEO Lisa O'Brien said vulnerable students returning to school might need additional learning support to make up for lost time. "It's important we act now so these students don't fall even further behind," she said. The ABC understands states are working on testing programs to identify students who have fallen behind. 
Coronavirus restrictions mean big changes to how people grieve and mourn across a range of communities
Lisa Gossling slept by her mother Pat's side in her final days at the nursing home and was there as the 82-year-old drew her last breath. "I said, 'You can do this, it's okay' and she peacefully went in the middle of one of her favourite songs," she said. Within days of Pat's passing, the COVID-19 response went from a few measures to funerals limited to just 10 people. For Lisa, saying goodbye instantly became more complicated. "My brother's got six kids, my sister's got two, we've got three  how do you choose what eight people go to that funeral?" Surfers Paradise Catholic Priest Peter Dillon and his colleague have conducted more than 20 funerals since the March restrictions were put in place. He witnessed first-hand how coronavirus was changing the grieving process. "The family and the loved ones also have the added issue of having to decide who can be there, how they select the closest friends and relatives," he said. For journalist Osman Faruqi, the death of a friend last week came as a shock. Sam, a talented writer and close friend, was just 23 years old. "They were the young person in the prime of their lives who brought so much joy and love to people around them," he said. "Hearing that they had gone has led to this intense flood of emotions that don't quite make sense." Faruqi told The Drum that grieving had been harder than he could have predicted. "To try and make sense of [your emotions], you want to be around people who understand what you are feeling," he said. Travel restrictions have meant it was more difficult for Osman to get back to Sydney, where Sam lived. "I certainly never expected myself to be in a situation where someone very close to me passed away and the first thought I had was, 'Will I be able to attend the funeral? How will I get there and physically be in a space where I can grieve with people?'" Senior Rabbi Yaakov Glasman from the St Kilda Hebrew Congregation said COVID-19 created a "vacuum" of human connection in recent weeks. "My sense is that mourners are more vulnerable then they were before." It is not unusual for hundreds of people to normally attend an Orthodox Jewish Funeral. "[Now] you feel like you are walking into this empty space, it just doesn't have the same kind of spirit," he said. Rabbi Glasman told The Drum that live streaming funeral services were always available but now it is a requirement, rather than an addition. This includes hosting the seven-day mourning period  the shiva gathering  via Zoom. "My sense has been that families that have taken up [that] opportunity have been deeply grateful for it." "When they felt most alone and they felt most vulnerable it was the ability to be able to connect  albeit via Zoom or via technology  that gave them a sense of comfort and a sense of feeling supported during their difficult times." "A good funeral enables people to grieve well, to go through the process of separation from the people they loved," Reverend Dr Colleen O'Reilly told The Drum. Rev O'Reilly said the ritual of a funeral is a fundamental part of making sense of the "chaotic" world people can find themselves in after a loved one has died. Like Rabbi Yaakov Glasman, both the Lebanese Muslim Association and Surfer's Paradise Catholic Parish made the necessary changes to keep the funeral process as "normal" as it could be, in COVID times. Father Peter Dillon was "pleasantly surprised" by his community's response  particularly to the restrictions on the number of people who could be physically present at the event. "Not having to speak to large crowds of people allows us to be a lot more personal, a lot more connected with what is taking place." He's now considering continuing to offer streaming as part of his services post-COVID-19. The Lebanese Muslim Association told The Drum their funeral proceedings would normally involve hundreds, sometimes thousands of people. "The [distancing] rules have been something the community really had to grapple with," he said. The group has chosen not to stream services, out of respect for the deceased. But Ahmad Malas said they were able to find ways to maintain the very communal way of saying goodbye. "People have been providing that continuous support to the family over the phone or through social media like Facebook, WhatsApp." Father Dillon said plans to regroup after restrictions are eased might be too much for some. "People may not necessarily have the inner strength to be able to replicate this again down the track." But for others, it's an opportunity. Pat's body has been cremated and Lisa plans to have a memorial with family and friends when the COVID-19 threat has passed. "I think it's given us a breather to find out what we really want. "I think with time to process it, we'll be like, 'this is the right way forward'." 
Coronavirus update: Japan set to unveil second stimulus package worth more than 100 trillion yen
The Japanese Government is reportedly putting the final touches on a relief package worth more than $1 trillion as the country's economy prepares for its worst slump since World War II. Meanwhile, Europeans and Americans took advantage of the first holiday weekend since coronavirus restrictions were eased, while British Prime Minister Boris Johnson voiced his support for Dominic Cummings, his senior adviser who travelled across England during the lockdown. This story will be regularly updated throughout Monday. Japan is finalising a coronavirus relief package worth more than 100 trillion yen ($1.4 trillion), following last month's 117-trillion-yen stimulus, according to reports in the Nikkei newspaper. The package, to be funded by a second extra budget for the current fiscal year beginning in April, would be the latest effort by Tokyo to support an economy on track for its deepest slump since World War II, as the pandemic crushes businesses and consumer spending. Japan ended state of emergency measures for most regions and plans to hold a panel discussion on Monday to decide whether to lift them in remaining places, including Tokyo. "Japan's economy is in an extremely severe state and we need to pull out of this situation as soon as we can," Finance Minister Taro Aso said last week. The Government is expected to approve the budget after Japan's economy slipped into recession in the last quarter, with analysts expecting another 22 per cent contraction in April-June due to the hit from the health crisis. The deepening pain from the pandemic is forcing the Government to add to Japan's huge debt pile, which is already twice the size of its economy, to pay for big spending plans. According to a study by Columbia University economics professor Ceyhun Elgin, Japan has some of the most aggressive relief spending of any country, with its last package worth more than 20 per cent of the country's GDP. That compares to around 14 per cent in the US and 11 per cent in Australia spent on bailouts and stimulus. The Birdsville races, known as the Melbourne Cup of the outback, will not go ahead this year due to coronavirus concerns. Famous for its dusty track in the Simpson Desert, the two-day event draws thousands of people to the small town in Queensland's Diamantina Shire, which normally has a population of just 115 people. The races were set to be held on September 4 and 5, but have been cancelled in a devastating blow for the town's economy. "As much as we were holding onto the hope that we could run them, we're at a point where we've had to concede defeat. The health of our patrons, and those who live in Outback Queensland, is of paramount importance to us and it is impossible to know what the status with COVID-19 will be come September," Birdsville Race Club president Gary Brook said. "We have been following the Queensland Government's roadmap for easing of restrictions, and with the easing of restrictions on mass gatherings not currently part of the roadmap, it is too much of a stretch to expect that by September we could safely host thousands of people in Birdsville." Birdsville has hosted the races since 1882 but it was last cancelled as recently as 2007, due to equine influenza. The 2021 edition of the races has been pencilled in for September 3 and 4, when organisers are hoping for a record crowd thanks to a possible boom in domestic tourism. The Government does not plan to expand the criteria or the timeframe for JobKeeeper and JobSeeker payments introduced during the pandemic, according to the Treasurer. Despite the Government having to spend $60 billion less than expected on JobKeeper payments due to errors made by businesses filling out applications, Josh Frydenberg told News Breakfast there were no plans for "wholesale changes". Mr Frydenberg emphasised both the new JobKeeper program and the boosted JobSeeker payment (formerly Newstart) are "temporary, targeted and proportionate to the challenge we face". He did, however, flag that the tourism sector could be in need of more assistance, with international borders set to remain closed even as the rest of the country opens up, which would be a topic of conversation at a scheduled review of JobKeeper next month. "The tourism sector could be one sector in need of further support. That's what we'll look at in the context of the economic situation at the time. You'll continue to see our international borders closed for some time," he said. "It's estimated some 850,000 people will be back in work as a result of those three stages of restrictions being lifted. That's the way to get people back into a job."  Europeans soaked up plenty of sun where they could over the weekend, as governments grappled with how and when to safely let in foreign travellers to salvage the vital summer tourist season. Across Europe, a mishmash of travel restrictions appears to be on the horizon, often depending on where travellers live and what passports they carry.  Germany, France and other countries aim to open their borders for European travel in mid-June, but it isn't clear when intercontinental travel will resume. Spain, one of the worst-hit countries in the pandemic and also one of the world's top destinations for international travellers, says it won't reopen for foreign tourists until July. In Germany, domestic tourists will be allowed to return to Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania in the north-east  home to the country's Baltic Sea coast  and to hotels in Berlin this week. The La Grande-Motte resort beach in France came up with a way to control its usual weekend crowds by introducing a booking system. Beachgoers must pre-book an 8-square-metre patch of sand online, and that area will will be roped off to keep them a safe distance from others. Reservations are free but required, and there is already a two-day waiting list. In Paris, where all city parks remain closed, locals soaked up the sun along the embankments of the Seine River and lounged on ledges outside the Tuileries Gardens.  From Thursday, the White House will start denying admission to foreigners who have been in Brazil during the two-week period before they hoped to enter the US, broadening its travel ban against countries hit hardest by coronavirus. President Donald Trump had already banned travel from the United Kingdom, Europe and China, and flagged last week that he was considering similar restrictions for Brazil. The US leads the world in the number of confirmed cases, with more than 1.6 million, followed by Brazil (363,000) and Russia (344,000). An adviser to Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro said the restrictions followed previously established benchmarks, playing down the move from Mr Trump, whose support Mr Bolsonaro has touted. "There is nothing specific against Brazil. We hope that'll be temporary," tweeted Filipe Martins, an advisor on international affairs to the Brazilian President. Press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said Mr Trump's latest move was designed to "protect our country", which is expected to pass 100,000 coronavirus deaths in coming days. As with the other bans, it does not apply to legal permanent residents or spouses, parents or children of US citizens or legal permanent residents. Brazil has recorded more than 22,000 deaths  the fifth highest tally in the world. The Memorial Day weekend, which marks the unofficial start of summer in the US, meant big crowds at beaches and warnings from authorities about people disregarding the coronavirus social-distancing rules. Americans traditionally spend the weekend travelling to beaches, gathering at backyard barbecues and unfurling picnic blankets in parks. Among those soaking in the sun and enjoying a bit of travel on Saturday was President Donald Trump, who was seen golfing at his Trump National Golf Club in northern Virginia, his first golf outing since the White House declared a national emergency over the coronavirus outbreak in March. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson has backed senior adviser Dominic Cummings, despite calls from within his own Conservative Party for the aide to resign for travelling more than 400 kilometres during the coronavirus lockdown.  "I conclude that in travelling to find the right kind of childcare, at the moment when both he and his wife were about to be incapacitated by coronavirus, and when he had no alternative  I think he followed the instincts of every father, and every parent. And I do not mark him down for that.," Mr Johnson said. "I believe that in every respect he has acted responsibly and legally." Mr Cummings, who masterminded the 2016 Brexit campaign, came under pressure after it emerged that he had travelled from London to Durham in late March while showing symptoms of COVID-19, when Britain was under a strict lockdown to combat the outbreak. Since players returned to limited group training earlier this week, eight positive tests for the virus have been confirmed at England's top football clubs. Six individuals, including Watford defender Adrian Mariappa and Burnley assistant manager Ian Woan, were positive in the first round of testing on May 17-18. A Bournemouth player was one of two people working for Premier League clubs who tested positive following a second batch of testing No matches have been played in the Premier League since March, but the UK Government has given the go-ahead for elite sport to resume from June 1. The Premier League's Project Restart envisages a return to competitive action in June, although no date has been fixed. Similarly, the Spanish La Liga competition has been given the green light by Spanish authorities to return to action from June 8. All organised soccer in Spain was provisionally suspended on March 12, although clubs in the top two divisions have since returned to group training. La Liga has yet to officially confirm a date on which it will resume, although its president Javier Tebas had said previously he hoped the season could restart on June 12. ABC/wires 
Yemen's health system 'has in effect collapsed' as coronavirus spreads 'largely undetected', UN says
Hundreds of deaths from "coronavirus-like symptoms" have raised fears COVID-19 is rapidly spreading undetected throughout war-torn Yemen, where the United Nations and medical workers say the health care system "has in effect collapsed". According to official numbers, Yemen have confirmed 212 infections and 39 deaths, but with one of lowest rates of testing in the world, aid workers fear this figure is "just the tip of the iceberg". Medicins Sans Frontieres (MSF) reported on Friday as many as 80 people were dying at home per day  up from a pre-outbreak norm of 10  in the city of Aden, where the international aid group run the only dedicated COVID-19 centre in southern Yemen. "What we are seeing in our treatment centre is just the tip of the iceberg in terms of the number of people infected and dying in the city," said Caroline Seguin, MSF's operations manager for Yemen. "People are coming to us too late to save, and we know that many more people are not coming at all. They are just dying at home." Earlier this month, Save the Children reported at least 385 deaths within one week from "coronavirus-like symptoms" in Aden. War-ravaged Yemen, whose malnourished population has among the world's lowest immunity levels to disease, is divided between the Saudi-backed Government based in Aden and its foe, the Iran-aligned Houthi group, in the north. This week Jens Laerke, spokesman for the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, told a Geneva briefing that after five years of war and now a pandemic, "Yemen is really on the brink" and its health system "has in effect collapsed". The UN estimates that it will seek $US2 billion ($3 billion) for Yemen to maintain aid programs through to the end of the year, Mr Laerke said. "If we do not get the money coming in, the programs that are keeping people alive, are very much essential to fighting back against COVID, will have to close," he said. "And then the world will have to witness . . . what happens without a functioning health system battling COVID. I do not think the world wants to see that." Aid agencies say Yemen desperately needs medical equipment, protective gear for health workers and widespread testing to combat the virus. In a report, the International Rescue Committee (IRC) listed coronavirus testing rates in Yemen among the lowest in the world  31 tests per million, compared to 45,910 tests per million in Australia and 38,394 tests per million in the United States. As coronavirus spreads around the globe, health experts and aid groups fear some of the world's most vulnerable countries in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and the Pacific could become new hotspots for COVID-19. "[The] significant shortfall in COVID-19 testing in many conflict-affected countries highlights the dangerous prospect of undetected and therefore uncontrolled outbreaks as the coronavirus continues to spread globally," the report said. The IRC's president and chief executive David Miliband said a "global response" was crucial to "beat the pandemic". "We are in a race against time  This pandemic will not come to an end here until it is under control everywhere," he said. "COVID-19 has already brought the strongest health systems in the world to their knees," Mr Miliband said, adding that war had caused a "shocking disparity of health system capacity" in Yemen. "The lack of testing is a major barrier to even seeing the tip of this global iceberg, let alone its full and devastating scale." Medical workers in southern Yemen told the ABC that some staff had been detained or threatened by authorities for sharing information about the outbreak on social media. "There is no testing capacity and your authorities in the north are hiding the potency indicators," said one medical professional who asked not to be identified for fear of reprisals. "The situation is a disaster, it's devastating." The cap on information has left the public largely unaware of the dangers or reliant on false information about the pandemic. In Aden, health workers said many patients were not coming forward with symptoms due to fears of being locked in the city's isolation centre. One gravedigger said he had never seen such a constant flow of dead  even in a city that has seen multiple bouts of bloody street battles during the civil war. Drone footage seen by the ABC showed mass burials taking place on the outskirts of the city. The Yemeni Government has not enforced widespread lockdown measures, curfews or social distancing to curb the pandemic. "There are no measures taken in the north and very little in the south," a medical professional told the ABC, speaking on condition of anonymity. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. He said large gatherings were still widespread according to local traditions during the Islamic month of Ramadan, while access to patients in many areas was also being hindered by the ongoing conflict. "We have very strong reason to be afraid of the devastating impact of COVID-19 in Yemen," he said. "We are almost losing control all the time  It can be very, very bad for the country and for the population." Meanwhile, at least five hospitals closed in Aden over the past week, as there was no money to pay staff and no protective equipment for workers, he said. Before the outbreak, the country's medical system was already on the verge of collapse after five years of war and widespread famine. There are also fears seasonal outbreaks of cholera, diphtheria and dengue, which occur frequently throughout the country, could further devastate medical resources. 
Tough times for meat processors battling trade restrictions and record livestock prices
Record livestock prices are forcing some abattoirs in New South Wales to cancel shifts or shut down operations in the short term. JBS shut down its plant in Scone last Friday due to a shortage of livestock while Southern Meats in Goulburn has shut down its plant this week. The Eastern Young Cattle Indicator (EYCI) hit a record high this week as rainfall around New South Wales and Queensland encouraged producers to hang on to their livestock.  The price of young cattle has doubled in the first two months of 2020 and while a record number of cows and heifers were processed last year slaughter rates are now slowing down significantly. That is creating big problems for the red meat industry and the peak body is now calling for cuts to government charges to help keep the abattoirs running. Trade lamb prices have also surged 25 per cent this year and are now threatening the $10/kg barrier. The sharp rise forced Southern Meats Group to shut down its abattoir in Goulburn this week. CEO Coll MacRury said it was a short-term strategy to help manage costs and avoid them running at a loss. "The prices are just crazy at the moment and  we will continue to be in out and of the market while it remains at this level," he said. Southern Meats will be operating with limited kills next week but the outlook is likely to get even harder for sheep processors.  Rural Bank is forecasting a 45 per cent drop in the slaughter rate heading into winter as producers hang on to their livestock to re-build the flock after the long drought. Mr MacRury confirmed the company's other in Western Australia WAMMCO would continue to operate at this stage. With some abattoirs cutting back shifts or closing abattoirs short term, it is possible that casuals in the industry may lose their jobs.  Patrick Hutchinson, the CEO of the Australian Meat Industry Council, said that would be a big hit to regional economies as the sector employs 40,000 people directly. "They may go to shutting down completely, they may go to three days a week, or two shifts to one shift, there's a number of levers they can pull." He said processors will be cautious about longer shut downs as it can take a long time to get back up to speed again.  Patrick Hutchinson is calling for relief from Federal Government charges as well as cuts to State Government payroll taxes. "We pay about a $100m in export certification fees and on a state base level, what about payroll tax exemption over a two-year period?" "That could save a medium-sized abattoir $1m a year," he said. Mr Hutchinson warned of the consequences for the broader economy if meat processors, Australia's biggest agricultural industry, experienced a downturn. "If it sneezes will the rest of agriculture catch a cold?" ABC News Online readers share how coronavirus is already affecting their work, what impacts it might have and how businesses are preparing for the worst. High prices and short supply of livestock were not the only problems facing the abattoirs. The outbreak of coronavirus has led to a downturn in the chilled export beef market, according to one business operator in southern NSW. Monbeef in Cooma supplies boxed beef throughout Australia and to 26 other countries. Plant manager John Hill said demand had dropped off due to movement restrictions in China and refrigerated and freezer containers were also stuck there. "The export job at the moment has had a downturn because of the coronavirus." "We now have to pre-book shipping containers three and four weeks in advance," he said. "It means we have to plan for the quantities of product down to the last box, or we lose our spot on the vessels." Prices have also softened, he said, but the reduced demand from China may only be temporary. Analysts from Rural Bank estimate that the shortage in protein in China caused by the massive cull of pigs due to the outbreak of African swine fever will probably result in that country importing large volumes of beef instead. While the coronavirus is affecting exports and record prices in Australia is making it tough to source livestock, John Hill said Monbeef in Cooma would stay open. "We're still in full production and hope to be in full production for quite a while." "I think the one thing in our advantage is we are a small plant and we firmly believe we'll be able to source enough cattle to keep up production." "The big priority, is keeping cattle in front of my staff, so we are in production as many days as possible." 
Victoria to ease coronavirus restrictions to allow gatherings of up to 20 people in homes
Victorians will be allowed to have up to 20 people in their homes and stay overnight at private residences and tourist accommodation from June 1, under an easing of coronavirus restrictions. Camping will also be allowed at state and national parks, but communal facilities like kitchens and bathrooms will remain closed. Victorians will be able to celebrate weddings with up to 20 people in addition to the celebrant and couple, and up to 50 people at funerals. Up to 20 people will be allowed at other religious ceremonies, in addition to those required to perform the service. "It's not so much about 'stay home', but it is absolutely about 'stay safe'," Premier Daniel Andrews said. In an early concession ahead of the June changes, Victorians will be able to use outdoor playgrounds, skateparks and outdoor gym equipment from Tuesday  the same day some children return to state schools. But those who can work from home will be urged to continue to do so, to prevent the amount of contact that occurs when colleagues share bathrooms, kitchens and office spaces. Mr Andrews said that, along with the cumulative impact of the "cautious easing" of restrictions, would be reassessed in June. "I know it's inconvenient  but if you have been working from home you must keep working from home throughout June," Mr Andrews said. The Premier announced the changes as it was revealed two new cases of COVID-19 were recorded in Victoria overnight. The state's total rose to 1,603, a net increase of one after an earlier case was recorded as a duplicate. Updated Sunday, May 24 The 20-person limit in homes will include members of that household. Mr Andrews said the resumption of overnight stays would be "critically important" to the tourism and hospitality industry, which had been hit hard by the shutdown. "Hotels, motels, other important accommodation venues  particularly in regional Victoria where we know tourism is such an important part, and particularly bushfire-affected communities  that sector will be able to reopen from June 1," he said. Accommodation venues will have to have strict rules in shared spaces. Public libraries, some entertainment and cultural venues and zoos will also be reopened to smaller crowds. Up to 20 people will again be able to swim at pools, while community sport will be allowed to resume with the 20-person cap in undivided spaces, provided physical-distancing measures are observed. Beauty services like nail salons, spas and tattoo parlours will be able to reopen with up to 20 customers per space. They will be required to keep customers' contact details. Mr Andrews last week announced cafes, restaurants and pubs will be open to 20 patrons from June 1, provided physical-distancing guidelines were met. A timeline for the reopening of clubs is not yet known, with Mr Andrews saying it will be difficult to manage physical-distancing rules without seating and with the presence of alcohol. "[Clubs] would have to look very, very different, and it will be a matter of us engaging with that sector to see whether they want to open up under those rules," he said. The Andrews Government has faced criticism for the speed at which restrictions have been eased. Other states allowed broader changes earlier this month. The Premier again linked the gradual lifting of restrictions to the state's aim to prevent the pandemic from getting out of control as it had in countries overseas. "There are examples in other countries where they opened too much, too quickly, and now they've had to reintroduce even tougher rules, even harder lockdowns," he said. "We're doing this in a careful and cautious way, that's the only way to do it." Mr Andrews said the state would look to further relax restrictions from June 22 if transmission rates remained low and testing rates remained high. From that date, indoor fitness and recreation facilities are scheduled to open with up to 20 people per space and up to 10 people per group or activity at any one time. Restaurants, cafes, galleries and museums will then be allowed to host up to 50 people and, for the first time, cinemas and theatres will reopen. "And for those eager to hit the slopes, the ski season will open slightly later this year on June 22," Mr Andrews said. The Premier said all the sectors affected by the announced easing of restrictions would be comprehensively consulted in coming weeks about the precautions needed as life returned to some sense of normality. "If we just have everybody returning to business as usual in those indoor workplaces then we will just see this virus spread and all of our good work will be frittered away," he said. Throughout the announcement, Mr Andrews stressed widespread testing of every Victorian with even the slightest coronavirus symptoms was "critical" to enabling the easing of restrictions. "That's what gives us options," he said. "The more people that get tested, the more options we have to not make changes based on guesswork, but instead to make changes based on what the data is telling us. "With so few community transmissions and so much testing, we are now able to further ease restrictions in many different sectors." Health Minister Jenny Mikakos said the state had undertaken more than 420,000 tests since they began at the start of the year. A target of 150,000 new tests to be completed in the window between the last easing of restrictions on May 13 and the end of the month has already been exceeded, with 174,000 tests one week ahead of schedule. "As we ease, we have to continue testing at record high levels," Mr Andrews said. "If you wait until people start presenting into emergency departments, it is too late." 
Queensland Government offers vouchers to get kids back into community sport after coronavirus
Parents whose incomes have been slashed because of the coronavirus pandemic are set to receive financial help from the Queensland Government to get their children back into community sport. Vouchers of $150 will be available for families who can prove the pandemic financial hit, as sporting clubs prepare to return to training and play from June 13 onwards. Sport Minister Mick Di Brenni said many families would struggle to re-enrol their kids into much-loved weekend activities. "This is about making sure that 73,000 households in Queensland that are doing it tough are going to be able to afford to play sport," he said. "Kids have been through a lot in 2020. This has been a really tough time for them. "And giving them the opportunity to get back out on the sporting field, with their friends, is extremely important." The Government will also repurpose more than $50 million of sports funding to get clubs ready to operate under new COVID-19 restrictions. From June 13, sports teams with up to 20 people will be allowed to resume, in line with strict coronavirus restrictions, including non-contact provisions. Full contact sport, and all other activities with larger groups, can resume a month later. All clubs will need to develop COVID-safe plans, which will include the sterilisation of equipment, the use of sanitisation stations, the reduction of spectators, and social distancing on the sidelines through the use of physical barriers in high-population areas. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said the $50m would be given as grants to help clubs get ready for the "new normal". "That includes $2,000 funding grants for up to 7,000 clubs state-wide to buy their cleaning equipment and other essentials," she said. "So, as we carefully start to resume training, sanitising balls, racquets and facilities before and after use is an absolute must to keep everyone and our communities safe." "It gives them time to get their COVID-safe plans in place and so that parents are aware and children as well." Federal guidelines have recommended limits on the number of parents, guardians and onlookers at games, which Ms Palaszczuk has backed. "It is going to be tough but we have to do it," she said. "What we don't want to see is large groups of parents congregating, as does happen on the side of sporting fields. "We really just have to listen to the health advice." 
Wedding celebrants suffer as couples put marriage on hold during coronavirus pandemic
The coronavirus pandemic has served up a double dose of disappointment for one marriage celebrant from Ballarat in central Victoria. Kate Ritchie, who has presided over ceremonies for 12 years, has not only taken an economic hit from cancelled and postponed ceremonies, but her own wedding to her fiance David, slated for April 9, had to be put on the backburner too. "We had decided it was probably not in the best interest of some of our family members to [carry on with the ceremony]," she said. "I didn't want my wedding to be remembered because Gran got sick or Grandpa got sick. "We had our little cry and then we put on our big girl undies and kept marching on." The couple now hope to exchange their vows early next year. "It's going to be a challenge to fit into that dress," Ms Ritchie said. "It fit me then but I don't think it will fit me after winter. "We're lucky  not many people get to look forward to their wedding twice. "We had months of looking forward to the wedding that was originally organised and now we get that excitement all over again." While the restrictions have forced some of Ms Ritchie's clients to change their wedding plans, she has been grateful the timing of the lockdown only affected the tail end of Ballarat's wedding season. The weddings that Ms Ritchie has officiated during the coronavirus pandemic have been restricted to five people, which included the bride, groom and celebrant.  In Victoria, guest numbers have now been lifted to 10, plus the couple. Bindi Irwin ties the knot at Australia Zoo, just before the Federal Government's restrictions on the number of wedding guests that came into force at midnight. "A lot of extra thinking has gone on  we've got hand sanitiser and wipes for the pens and we've got to stand this far [1.5 metres] away," she said. "Even things like signing documents [have had to be considered]. "It's really hard to show someone where they need to sign the document when you can't get within 1.5 metres of them. "I've never had so many little sticky notes over the documentation." This month the Federal Government announced it was waiving registration fees for celebrants from July 1. Ms Ritchie said the move was a welcome relief for many in her industry. While some treat being a celebrant as a side hustle, many celebrants work full-time in the profession. Bendigo celebrant, Rosemary Taylor, said she had one wedding cancelled, another that went ahead during the lockdown, and a couple of ceremonies rescheduled for next year. She said one couple planned to come down from Brisbane and have the wedding in Bendigo because the bride had family there. "She rang me and said, 'We're going to cancel the whole thing and just have a registry office wedding on the Gold Coast'," Mrs Taylor said. "They just decided to keep it low key. "There are other brides [and grooms] that are just waiting to see and hoping it will be ok." Mrs Taylor has a wedding booked for June 21, but it was still up in the air. "It has [affected business] but it's swings and roundabouts," she said. "I'll probably be twice as busy next year." Where and when you have your wedding in Australia will dictate how many invites you are allowed to send out. The Northern Territory has not specified a limit on outdoor weddings, and in Queensland the current 10-person limit is set to increase to 20 from June 12 and up to 100 from July 10. West Australian weddings can have up to 20 people inside or 30 people outside. Ten guests can also attend a wedding in New South Wales right now, not including the couple, celebrant and photographer. Victoria has a similar rule; 10 guests plus the couple and celebrant and the same applies in Tasmania. The Australian Capital Territory also has a 10-person rule for weddings but it differs slightly in that the number includes the couple, but does not include the celebrant and photographer. South Australia also includes the couple in their 10-person limit but not the celebrant or "necessary staff". 
Coronavirus lockdown to lift on June 5 for NT remote communities, Chief Minister says
The Northern Territory Government has confirmed restrictions on travel within the NT will be lifted on June 5. Chief Minister Michael Gunner said the Biosecurity Act  limiting travel to remote communities  would be removed almost two weeks ahead of schedule after consultation with land councils and traditional owners. "We can lift our biosecurity zones safely because of our strict border controls. It's been weeks since we've had a new case, and Territorians are doing the right thing," Mr Gunner wrote on Facebook. "I know it hasn't been easy, but soon, Territorians will be able to move freely between communities and come into town and return home again without having to quarantine." Mr Gunner said the NT's interstate travel restrictions would remain in place indefinitely and the Queensland, WA and South Australian borders would stay closed. The Biosecurity Act was originally due to expire on June 18, but land councils lobbied strongly for the restrictions to lift on June 5  the same day as stage-three coronavirus restriction easing in the Northern Territory. In advocating the June 5 date, Central Land Council chief executive Joe Martin-Jard said the isolation of residents in remote communities was creating barriers to essential supplies, including warm clothing. "We don't want to see double standards emerging where people could get a laksa at Parap Markets and have a bet at the pub from June 5, but the community mob are still locked in," Mr Martin-Jard said. The NT Government moved swiftly to restrict access to remote communities, where Indigenous populations suffer disproportionate levels of chronic disease that are risk factors for coronavirus. Following the announcement of relaxed travel restrictions within the Territory, the NT Government launched a tourism initiative encouraging residents to "get out and enjoy their backyard". Tourism Minister Lauren Moss said the $200,000 campaign dubbed 'Time to be a Territorian' would nudge NT residents to spend on local holidays and provide operators with some relief from the multi-million-dollar revenue blackhole left due to interstate and international border closures. "Over the last few months we've sacrificed a lot to keep Territorians safe. We've looked out for each other, and now we need to keep looking out for each other by experiencing as much of our own backyard as we can," Ms Moss said. "Following[the] announcement thatbiosecurity restrictionswill be removed from5 June, we are encouraging locals to begin planning experiences like a fishing charter, a water cruise, a cultural experience or an overnight stay, which are crucial to supporting our tourism sector. "It's still going to be incredibly tough, because obviously we have a smaller population in the Territory, but I think this will help tour operators adapt to what the new normal looks like for them." Ms Moss said she believed remote communities would "welcome the opportunity to travel freely around the NT and welcome people back into their communities". "We know that land councils and traditional owners have been working with both levels of government on the lifting of biosecurity zones," she said. 
Family self-isolate from coronavirus pandemic in outback Queensland 'oasis'
Keiran Lusk feels strangely liberated by living in coronavirus enforced isolation in outback Queensland. He mows the law in his undies if he feels like it, plays loud music and lifts rocks to keep fit  and couldn't care less what people think about him. He and his young family have paused an epic road trip in a renovated bus to sit out the pandemic as caretakers of a remote property, almost 750 kilometres west of Brisbane. "Living in isolation has provided me with a unique opportunity to be myself," he said. "I am happier and more at peace with myself than I've been in years." With no confirmed coronavirus cases in the region, no neighbours and no visitors, they are far from the stress and anxiety of illness, lockdowns and movement restrictions. "It does feel very surreal out here, we're not affected in anyway, I almost feel a little bit guilty," he said. "It's a very special place to ride out a pandemic, you couldn't ask for better." Mr Lusk is no stranger to isolation. He spent five years living on Moreton Island off the coast of Brisbane, working as a park ranger on the third biggest sand island in the world. "It's like the lighthouse  it's the same sort of remoteness out here," he said. "We actually feel like we're living a similar sort of life that we lived on the island." Mr Lusk spent two years converting an old bus into a mobile home and late last year he and his wife Sam sold up and the family hit the road. "We've been on the road in Bronte the bus for over six months now," he said. "In recent months, we've been slowly plodding around western Queensland and free camping by outback rivers and little country towns, but our plans changed somewhat with the emergence of COVID-19, travel restrictions and nationwide lockdowns. "With no home to return to and camping areas, parks and reserves closing, we were fortunate to find somewhere nearby to stop for a while." They are now caretaking a remote homestead west of Charleville, called Lass O'Gowrie. "We're maintaining the beautiful gardens  it had a prize-winning garden, beautiful lush lawns, it's like an oasis," Mr Lusk said. "We're growing veggies, we've got lots of space and room to move. "The house hasn't got any furniture, but we don't care.  "We're living in the bus at the front door and the boys have got a dedicated Lego room, dedicated Monopoly and games rooms in the house  it's great. "It's wonderfully safe  if it wasn't for the flies we might live here forever." Mr Lusk is conscious that things could have been very different for his family if they had still been in Brisbane during the coronavirus pandemic. "I speak to friends and family in Brisbane, and I guess they're seeing the first hand results of the employment crisis and people that are out of work and shops that are closed  we don't see any of those impacts out here," he said. He said their days had taken on a particular rhythm. Mr Lusk is home-schooling his two boys while his wife works remotely as a public servant. "We're old hands at home-schooling  I wouldn't say that makes us good though," he said, laughing. "It's a lot of work, but having the kids around 24/7 it's wonderful quality time and it's really beautiful to be able to watch the boys develop and spend time with them every day." While reluctant to offer advice on how to deal with life in isolation, Mr Lusk said he had some strategies that had been working for him during these strange times. Be kind to yourself "As someone who has struggled with anxiety and depression over the years, the current opportunity to live in almost complete isolation has been strangely beneficial for me," he said. "I'm learning to be kind to myself. It is OK to have good days and it's OK to have not-so-good days." Have a routine "We are creatures of habit and enjoy having a routine and this has been particularly important," he said. Enjoy being yourself "Living in isolation has provided me with a unique opportunity to be myself, without the fear of others judging me, which is something I've struggled with all my life," he said. "If I want to water the veggie garden or mow the lawn in my undies, then I do it, although this strategy may not work so well for city folk. "Just find time to do the things that make you happy." Exercise "I've set myself a goal to come out of this isolation period feeling much more fit and healthy," he said. "Some mornings I get up early and take a solo ride on my bike around the property. "I'm also exercising with rocks each day  I call it 'rocksercising'  and have a pair of rocks outside the front door and whenever I leave the bus to go anywhere, I do some weights with my rocks as I walk." Sunshine "There is something magic about getting a little bit of sunshine each day," he said. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Mr Lusk said the family would get back on the road in the coming months. "I think we're keen to continue our travels when it is safe and when we're welcome to do so," he said. "This is just a staging ground where we can ride out the crisis and, when travel restrictions are lifted and towns are ready to welcome visitors back, we'll hit the road again." He said he knew his family were "incredibly lucky and fortunate to be where we are during this time". "We do appreciate how privileged we are to be in this situation too  it's not something that we're gloating about or feeling boastful," he said.  "I guess we're just very appreciative of the circumstances that we've found ourselves in". 
When coronavirus arrived these students' worlds turned upside down
The themes of safety and isolation feature in the artwork of two Queensland students who have documented their drastically changed world during COVID-19.  Year 12 student Lateisha Hurst, 17, created illustrations for her school yearbook combining native birds and symbols of the pandemic such as masks and hand sanitiser. Meanwhile, art student Ben Watson, 19, photographed both himself and his grandparents wearing personal protective equipment for his university assignment.  Lateisha, a vice captain at Noosa District State High School, remembers clearly the moment COVID-19 turned her world upside down. "It was on the news, and then the next day I went to work [at a local supermarket] and I had to change everything I was doing," she said. "We had to wipe down the benches after every customer and make sure we were all sanitised so we didn't pass [the virus] on to anyone."  Then school closed and Lateisha was navigating online learning and separated from her friends. "It was really hard  it was all online and we had to relearn everything  it was a big change," she said. "And I really liked hanging out with my friends. "It's a big part of who I am, so that was hard." Lateisha said returning to school was "one of the best feelings". "Just getting back to all my friends was a big part of that, and probably because everyone was in it together," she said. When she drew illustrations for the school's 2020 yearbook, titled Yali, which means "to call" in the local Gubbi Gubbi dialect, she captured the memories of COVID-19. "When we look back on our yearbook, we can think, 'Wow, all this actually happened'," Lateisha said. "I thought it was important to have a statement on the impact of COVID on our community, and how it's also affecting the environment. "We've seen so many animals that have come out into new places where they haven't before because of how populated those areas are. "So it's been a big change not for just the community but also for our wildlife." Lateisha said her main "takeaway" from living through the global pandemic was to see people could be more considerate of each other. "We have seen people working together and actually thinking about other people, where before COVID it wasn't as much," she said. Lateisha said the pandemic experience has made her determined to achieve her dreams of becoming a primary school teacher when high school ends. "I want to help people," she said. Creating a lasting visual record of the pandemic also became the focus for University of the Sunshine Coast (USC) photography students. Lecturer in photography, Tricia King, said her students had to quickly adapt a photo documentary project that was meant to be a narrative shadowing someone as the weeks went on. "At the start of the year, they could have photographed anything in the world but [as COVID struck] they have a very restricted pool of subjects," she said.  "So, we have actually documented the change in just a few weeks from going outside, to taking photos from the car only, to not going outside at all." Capturing history as it happened was a deeply personal project for 19-year-old USC student, Ben Watson. Over a period of three weeks he documented the change in his grandparents' daily lives during isolation, photographing them safely through windows, or wearing personal protection equipment and using a zoom lens to maintain a safe social distance inside the home. His images captured the additional care his grandmother has been giving his grandfather with dementia. "My grandma could no longer go out and do leisure activities or invite visitors home," Mr Waton said. "She had to stop carers coming to the house  she didn't want herself or my grandpa in contact from the coronavirus. "It's a very different world." Mr Watson said as a result of the social restrictions his grandfather's behaviours had altered a lot. "This was a very big change in my grandpa's routine," he said. "Now he spends a lot more time in his room alone." With restrictions easing, Mr Watson can now visit his grandparents without a mask but his images of their time in isolation have become a powerful and personal record of a historic time. The project has also fuelled his creative ambitions. "I put my heart and soul into this project," he said.  "My plan is to do something with photography when I graduate, like more photojournalism work." 
Canberra's coronavirus field hospital looks likely to go unused  and authorities say that's the best possible outcome
It belongs amid the ruins of a war-torn city, or in a rural village grappling with the horrors of famine. Instead, it sits on a suburban cricket field, in the heart of an affluent city, in one of the richest and most developed nations on Earth. It was built to prop up a healthcare system, facing a test for which it was not prepared. But the pop-up emergency department, constructed in just 37 days beside the Canberra Hospital on Garran Oval, will now likely sit idle and may never see a patient. According to the decision-makers who commissioned the $23 million project, it was an insurance policy, taken out as they faced an escalating health crisis both across the globe and within Australia. And they say that as the call was made, they feared it might already be too little, too late. To understand why the facility was built, we need to think back just eight weeks. The idea was first raised on March 20, and a decision was made to push ahead with building the facility on March 22. ACT Health Minister Rachel Stephen-Smith said politicians were watching case numbers soar, nationwide. "In Australia  we were starting to get really increased numbers of COVID-19 cases, day on day," she said. "And we were on that exponential part of the curve of COVID-19 cases." Advice was being handed to National Cabinet around what sort of capacity might be needed, which was then being passed on to state and territory health systems to transform into reality. Hospital capacity, particularly in intensive care, would in some cases need to double or even triple. Maps were drawn outlining how capacity could be extended across the ACT's health system, but Ms Stephen-Smith said they knew time was not a luxury they could afford. "What we had seen in other countries around the world was, by time they needed to make decisions to expand their health system capacity, it was too late," she said. "They were already overwhelmed. "It was really clear to us that we could not afford to be in that situation, that we had to ensure that our health system would have the capacity to cope with what we saw potentially coming down the track." And she, along with counterparts across the country, feared they may have already been caught out. "I think at that time I, and health ministers around the country, and first ministers, were extremely concerned that it was already too late," she said. "That all of the measures we were putting in place wouldn't be quick enough to actually flatten that curve, and that we would see hundreds and thousands of cases of COVID-19 in each of our major cities." Inside the health system, by late March, the global coronavirus situation was already having a clear impact locally. Supply chains for critical medical equipment were breaking down world-wide, and Canberra staff were anxious. Ordinary surgical masks, which usually cost 17 cents, skyrocketed in price to over $1. And where you could usually order as many as needed, and have them delivered in less than 24 hours, orders were being placed with no confidence as to when they might arrive. Deputy CEO of Canberra Health Services Dave Peffer said those were the circumstances decisions were being made in, and no one knew what was coming next. "Things were moving so rapidly that at that point in time, the uncertainty was so great, you really had to plan for what could potentially be a catastrophe," he said. Aspen Medical was contracted to build a pop-up emergency facility, and Garran Oval  directly across the road from Canberra Hospital  was identified as the best possible site. It would be 51 beds, and act as an emergency ward dedicated to both suspected and confirmed COVID-19 patients. On April 2, the facility was publicly announced, and fences were erected around where the site would stand. A total of $23 million was budgeted for the construction and operation, and the ACT Government would take ownership of the facility and all equipment. The World Health Organisation was consulted during the design and construction phase for advice. As an emergency department, it would both treat and triage patients  with all patients leaving within 24 hours, either discharged or admitted to another ward of the hospital. Among the 51 beds, six were equipped for resuscitation, and one for palliative care. Mr Peffer said as they looked abroad, it seemed like exactly the sort of facility that might be required. "We had health services around the world, good health services, crumbling under the weight of a pandemic," he said. "And the lessons we took away from that is often it was governments moving too slowly. "Where we had a situation with health services being underprepared, under resourced, and then very quickly overwhelmed. "The decision that was taken here was we weren't going to follow that path." The field hospital was assembled with extraordinary speed, and made from parts that could eventually be pulled apart and stored in shipping containers. The keys were handed to Canberra Health Services this week, but, beyond security guards, it largely sits empty. Beds line the halls and curtains hang from the roof, while a small array of medical equipment sits on shelves. Were it to be needed, it would take another three weeks to activate  with staff, gear, medicine and other necessities to be brought online. With no active cases of coronavirus in the ACT, that now seems unlikely. Instead, the hospital will probably be disassembled at the end of the flu season, packed up and sold to whoever needs it next. It is, undoubtedly, an expensive insurance policy. If it is not activated, the final cost will come in around $14 million, rather than $23 million. It is also unusual. Few similar facilities are being built around Australia, although the ACT Government pointed to a project at Monash Hospital in Victoria as an example. Despite this, Ms Stephen-Smith said it was the right response. "This is a global pandemic of the size that we haven't seen for 100 years, and it wouldn't be reasonable to build a health system with enough capacity to respond to a once in 100-year pandemic, and then have it sitting there empty for most of the time," she said. "That actually wouldn't be a good way to manage the public's resources and to plan in our health system." 
How WA coronavirus health operations chief Liz McLeod readied the state for an unprecedented pandemic
As Liz McLeod looks back on the past 12 weeks, she feels as though she has been given the gift of time. She watched as a never-before-seen virus broke out and began to spread across the world, killing at first hundreds, then thousands of people as it edged closer and closer to Western Australia. She was about to face a massive professional upheaval. Latest information from the WA Health Department Mrs McLeod was pulled from her role as chief executive of the East Metropolitan Health Service and found herself in a newly-created role  the chief executive of COVID Health Operations.  This made her the head of the team responsible for making sure Western Australia's hospitals and health system were ready for whatever COVID-19 brought with it. And that was a whole lot of unknowns. "One of the challenges we had in this whole process has really been a lack of modelling of what we were going to expect," she says. "It's been quite a moving plan in terms of understanding how many people we thought were going to be coming to our hospitals and also when they were going to be coming." Like the rest of the world, Mrs McLeod saw images of hospitals being overwhelmed in China, Italy and New York. She saw countries running out of hospital equipment like life-saving ventilators, while medical staff were rationing PPE (personal protective equipment). It was now her job to make sure those scenes weren't repeated in Western Australia.  "We were always thinking we were two weeks away from a very large surge of patients arriving," she says. WA hospitals have an emergency plan that is updated regularly, but Mrs McLeod says it was quickly evident that COVID-19 was a different beast and preparations would have to be unlike anything West Australians had seen. "What we knew was that COVID spreads quickly and we get that exponential growth in people with COVID," she says. Early advice for her team was to triple the state's hospital emergency department capacity and double the number of intensive care beds. "We had to work hard and we had to work fast to be as ready as we could be," she says. By March 10, WA had six confirmed cases of the virus and special COVID clinics were set up to test people returning from overseas who had flu-like symptoms. "We were all obviously watching the news and looking to our international colleagues and the evidence of what was happening internationally," Mrs McLeod says. COVID Health Operations, Mrs McLeod's team, made the decision to prepare 660 ICU beds  four times Western Australia's regular capacity. A few days later, as West Australians hit the supermarkets and began panic-buying groceries, her team was busy scrambling to purchase more ventilators for those beds. "Along with being busier in our hospitals, we were also expecting that more of our staff would have been impacted as well," she says When health staff began to fall ill and, in some cases, die overseas, they realised they could have an even bigger challenge on their hands. In anticipation, they launched a statewide recruitment drive. West Australians answered that call in their thousands  more than 7,000 of them applied. By the last week of March, WA was recording between 20 and 44 cases a day and the curve was going up. Her team was working around the clock, long days that bled into weeks.  But then, Western Australia turned a corner. On March 24, WA closed its interstate border and, by the start of April, even travel within the state was restricted. Along with 14-day quarantine periods introduced for people coming into the state, it meant rates of infection began to slow. WA has closed its borders to the east for the first time in history. Here's how you might be affected. "We were certainly expecting it to be a lot busier than what eventuated," Mrs McLeod says. By the start of May, WA had recorded its first full week with no new coronavirus cases. "We look back at it and it has been an extraordinary effort  the fantastic public health response and the fantastic response of the public has given us the gift of time," she says. Fortunately for Mrs McLeod and her team, the elusive two-week surge has still not eventuated. But that doesn't mean her team will rest easy.  "I think we're winning, but I don't think we're there yet. We've still got a long way to go  this is a marathon, not a sprint," she says. Western Australia started to ease more restrictions from May 18, with people allowed back into pubs, cafes and gyms, students heading back to school and some intrastate borders reopened.  Here's a guide to help you work out what will be allowed from May 18 and what is still offlimits. Now hospitals remain on alert for a second wave of infection. "We are still expecting there to be cases so we will maintain our alertness and readiness for some time," Mrs McLeod says. It's that gift of time she speaks of that has allowed her team to get ahead of demand and even update their emergency plans.  "We have to balance our optimism with caution, so we have to remain vigilant and remain ready to respond," she says. While a vaccination for COVID-19 remains a distant promise, she has one message for the people of WA. "We haven't finished yet, I think we are still only in the early days of COVID." 
Consortium launched amid coronavirus to make Aussies eat their fruit and vegetables
For many Australians, eating fruit and vegetables is a tough sell. Government data shows only 7 per cent of adults and 5 per cent of children eat sufficient serves of vegetables, while half of adults and two-thirds of children eat enough fruit. A new national body has been established to change our consumption habits and help the farmers who grow fresh produce. The Fruit and Vegetable Consortium is made up of 11 members including Nutrition Australia, AUSVEG, the Cancer Council of Victoria and various government bodies. Its chair, Lucinda Hancock, said there was a need for a consolidated national approach. "There's been a number of peak bodies in their own rights, however what hasn't happened is a collaboration between health research and also the vegetable industry and market authority," she said. "Really, that's been the missing piece which I think is absolutely vital. "If we don't pull together, I think the success of a campaign is minimal, hence why we really need the group." Ms Hancock said she believed Australians were confused over what to do with vegetables. "I think that for a lot of people, cooking skills are lacking and in the era of Uber Eats, a lot more people are eating takeaway, so they don't know how to prepare, store or what to do with leftovers," she said. "There's a perceived cost with vegetables and, of course, taste preference  people just don't naturally love vegetables." James Whiteside, chief executive of AUSVEG, agreed there was an issue with getting Australians to eat fruit and veg. "Our fruit consumption is a lot better than our vegetable consumption," he said. "We don't appreciate the nutritional value enough, even though we're told that they're good for us. "We're not good at creatively finding delicious ways to eat the product. "In some cases, there's a perception they're labour-intensive and require some effort to cook, which is not necessarily the case." The consortium hopes to address other factors affecting consumer habits, including cost, availability and supply. "Our plan would be to ensure that vegetables are available, and if we're in a really good position with the campaign with increased demand, hopefully we can also advocate to government to subsidise the cost of more expensive vegetables," Ms Hancock said. "What's really important is everybody has a right to consume vegetables equally and should be able to afford them." The campaign, while still in the works, hopes to have similar success to the Life Be In It and Slip, Slop, Slap commercials, and the more recent Eat Australian Lamb ads by the Meat and Livestock Australia. "These campaigns have perennially changed how we we behave  that's the sort of investment that you need to make," Mr Whiteside said. "It's probably going to take a period of five to seven years." In recent months, producers have reported an increase in demand for home-delivered fruit and vegetable boxes, particularly organic produce. Although Australia doesn't have a clear definition to certify organic produce, organic farming is known to use no man-made fertilisers, pesticides, growth regulators or livestock feed additives. Kristen Ottaway, who runs an organic online supermarket, said her business gathered produce from 22 farmers and delivered it throughout Brisbane. "We were sitting at around about 300 to 350 boxes a week before COVID hit, and then we skyrocketed to about 800 boxes a week overnight," Ms Ottaway said. While the surge was encouraging, farmers have seen demand steady as the pandemic goes on. Anthony Bauer, one of the country's largest suppliers of organic vegetables, said he recorded a large increase in demand in March. "When coronavirus hit, we had up to 400 per cent growth in the first few weeks, then it obviously settled down," he said. "We're maintaining now 30 per cent growth." Mr Bauer said he welcomed the introduction of the consortium. "We definitely need it. We need consumers to be putting more focus, more value, on fruit and veg," he said. "It's an important part of everyone's life and everyone's diet."  Watch this story on ABC TV's Landline at 12:30pm or oniview. 
Who's leading the race? A guide to coronavirus vaccines in the pipeline
There are more than 100 coronavirus vaccines in the pipeline and almost a dozen that have made it to human trials so far. But which one  if any  will be the panacea to the COVID-19 pandemic is still anyone's guess. Researchers working to develop a SARS-CoV-2 vaccine face a unique and significant set of challenges  not to mention the fact they're trying to do it in record time. While it will be some months before we know whether any of the proposed vaccines are effective, initial safety trials and encouraging animal studies show promising early signs. Let's take a closer look at some of the candidates leading the race (remembering those that make it to clinical trials first will not necessarily be the most effective). A quick recap, according to the World Health Organization, as of May 24. While vaccine developers typically follow a linear sequence (pre-clinical animal studies to Phase 1/2/3/4 human trials), the urgency of COVID-19 means many are speeding up their timelines. In some cases, Phase 1 and 2 trials are being squashed together (testing safety and effectiveness of the vaccine at the same time), or Phase 1 human safety trials are running before animal efficacy data is in. This week, all eyes were on an experimental vaccine produced by American biotech company Moderna  the first coronavirus vaccine to be tested in humans back in March.  On Monday, the biotech firm announced its RNA vaccine, which was given to 45 healthy individuals in a Phase 1 trial, appeared to be safe and promote an immune response against COVID-19. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Unlike more traditional vaccines, which contain a weakened version of the actual virus or portions of it, Moderna's vaccine is based on a new technology that involves taking genetic material from the virus and delivering it to healthy cells. Using messenger RNA (or mRNA), the vaccine carries instructions to the body to create the SARS-CoV-2 protein the vaccine is aiming to protect against. The idea is that the body detects the genetic material and new protein as foreign, and mounts an immune response  producing antibodies that learn to remember and fight the virus if the body encounters it again. Without publishing its findings in full, Moderna said preliminary data of eight people in its trial showed participants developed neutralising antibodies (which stop the virus replicating) at levels similar to people who have recovered from COVID-19. The findings, though limited, sent the company's share price soaring. But it later dropped when Medical news website STAT reported the figures "don't mean much on their own, because critical information  was withheld", including information about the other 37 trial participants. Like all vaccine candidates, Moderna's findings need to be repeated in much larger Phase 2 (and eventually Phase 3) clinical trials to prove the vaccine actually works. These are expected to begin soon. Meanwhile, two other genetic vaccines for COVID-19 have also made it to human trials  one from American biotech firm Inovio, and another jointly developed by pharmaceutical giant Pfizer and German company BioNTech. Inovio, which has enrolled 40 people in a phase 1 trial of its DNA vaccine, is expected to publish its results in early June. Pfizer, on the other hand, has begun delivering doses of its RNA vaccine to 360 volunteers in the US as part of a Phase 1/2 trial. The drug maker and its German partner said if the vaccine proved to be safe and effective, it could potentially be ready for US distribution by the end of the year. Kylie Quinn, a vice-chancellor's research fellow at RMIT University, said although genetic vaccines are relatively easy and inexpensive to produce, none have been approved for human use before. "We don't know how they're going to perform in humans, but the advantage of them is that they are very quick in terms of design and manufacturing, and should be relatively safe," said Dr Quinn. Using an entirely different approach, scientists at Oxford University's Jenner Institute recently announced a coronavirus vaccine they are working on appears to be protective in monkeys. The vaccine is already being tested in humans. According to a preliminary research paper  which has not yet been peer-reviewed  the vaccine candidate provided protection in six rhesus macaque monkeys who were vaccinated and then exposed to high levels of SARS-CoV-2. The animals had less of the virus in their lungs and airways when compared to non-vaccinated animals, and were protected from developing pneumonia. Oxford's vaccine candidate is known as a viral vector vaccine, and is one of several being developed for COVID-19. These vaccines work by introducing a different type of virus that is engineered to include proteins of the virus the vaccine is aiming to protect against. "You basically take a virus that is generally harmless but can infect cells and you use it like a trojan horse," Dr Quinn said. For the Oxford vaccine, a genetically modified version of a common cold virus (known as an adenovirus) from chimpanzees is being used to carry a protein from SARS-CoV-2 to the body. The goal is to stimulate an immune response and prime the body to respond to any future infection. Unlike most other vaccines, which begin with small clinical trials to demonstrate safety, this vaccine was fast-tracked because the research team had already tested very similar vaccines in humans for other viruses, including MERS and Ebola. Researchers hope to test the vaccine on more than 6,000 people in the UK by the end of May, as part of a Phase 1/2 trial. If those results show the vaccine is effective, they say the first few million doses could be available as soon as September, with emergency approval from regulators. Trevor Drew, director of CSIRO's Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness, said the decision by British drug-maker AstraZeneca to partner with Oxford to manufacture and distribute the vaccine was an encouraging sign. "The Oxford vaccine is really quite a clever one," Professor Drew said. "I think it's probably going to be one of the prime candidates." Besides Oxford, one other viral vector vaccine has made it to human trials. It comes from Chinese vaccine company CanSino. While CanSino is yet to publish detailed results of its Phase 1 trial, its vaccine candidate was the first to reach Phase 2 clinical trials back in April. Three of the remaining vaccines to have made it to human trials are "inactivated" vaccines, which means they contain the actual virus, but it's been killed by being exposed to ultraviolet light or chemicals. "This is a really simple and sometimes very effective way of introducing your immune system to something without having the potential to cause disease," Dr Quinn said. "It's a very old style of vaccine." Inactivated vaccines are slightly different to live attentuated vaccines, which involve introducing a "live" virus into the body, but one that has been weakened. Just a handful of COVID-19 vaccine candidates are using this approach, all still in pre-clinical trials. The three inactivated vaccines that have made it to human trials are being developed in China and are in Phase 1/2 clinical trials, however data from the initial phase 1 trials is limited. One of the vaccine candidates, developed by Chinese biopharmaceutical company Sinovac, was recently shown to be effective in rhesus macaque monkeys, who  like in the Oxford vaccine study  generated neutralising antibodies. "It builds the case that [this vaccine] is possibly viable and worth following up on," Dr Quinn said. The final type of vaccine researchers are pursuing are called subunit or protein vaccines. These contain only a fragment of the virus, rather than the whole thing. US biotech company Novavax recently begun Phase 1 clinical trials in Australia with a subunit vaccine that targets the "spike" protein on the surface of coronvirus particles. It's the same technique being pursued by researchers at the University of Queensland, who are set to begin clinical trials in July. There are pros and cons to every vaccine approach, and it may be that multiple candidates are found to show some protection against COVID-19. No vaccine is 100 per cent effective, and the vast majority of vaccines that make it to clinical trials do not succeed in getting to market. Given the challenges of manufacturing and distributing a vaccine on a global scale, Dr Quinn said it wouldn't be a bad outcome if several candidates were ultimately used. Get the latest health news and information from across the ABC. "Different vaccines have very specific manufacturing requirements," she said. "So perhaps having a few different vaccine formats that each show a level of protecting  we can spread the weight across different manufacturing facilities." Professor Drew said because the COVID-19 vaccine development timeline was being compressed, and some of the longer-term effects would be unknown, the decision to roll it out  if an effective vaccine was found  would likely be based on each country's individual level of risk. "How urgent is the vaccine needed, and what are the potential benefits against some of the more minor risks?" he said. "In the current situation with COVID-19, a lot of those decisions may be made with the acceptance [that] there may be some minor downstream issues, but certainly no worse than the current suffering that's being created by the disease itself."  
Coronavirus restrictions see 1930's Central Cookery Book become a bestseller
When Michael Roach first took over The Book Cellar in Tasmania's Campbell Town, he never thought a cookbook written in 1930 would be a bestseller. His book store, almost hidden off the typically bustling Midland Highway, is located underground in the convict cellars of heritage property Foxhunters Return, an 1830's-era coaching inn. Pride of place in the store's entry, surrounded by original sandstone walls, sits the bestsellers list, one of which is Alice Irvine's Central Cookery Book. "Since the coronavirus shutdowns, it's been our most popular book," Michael said. It's now in its 16th edition and is a cooking staple for many Tasmanian households. "It's very well known in the Tasmanian community", said Mr Roach. "A lot of parents have sent their children off with a copy when they leave home and I think that tradition has continued and pushed forward a bit during the crisis because people are returning to the basics." It's also recently gained an appetite internationally. "We've sold copies recently to Hawaii, of all places. In one weekend we sold a few online over there, which is great," he said. "What makes it interesting is this book has no pictures, it's very basic, it's a starter cookbook. "Some of the recipes include how to boil an egg, how to do the most basic things that the big cookbooks just dont touch. "It's not uncommon for people to buy several copies at once and send them off to grandchildren and that sort of thing." During the 1970s, it was a key text in Tasmanian classrooms. Ena Rigney has been teaching home economics in Launceston for 17 years and has fond memories of using the book at home as a child. "I grew up with the Central Cookery Book, it was one of the very few recipe books we had at home: being a Dutch migrant, recipe books were scarce," she said. "It was the one I used at school while studying and it has become a favourite of mine over the years. "It's how I learned to cook and I still use it while teaching my classes now. "I can probably recall 20 recipes from the book off the top of my head that I still use. "The simplicity chocolate cake, for example, was always a wonderful, easy-to-make chocolate cake because it was a melt-and-mix method and not many are a melt-and-mix method nowadays." Janelle Scott has worked alongside Ena for almost a decade at Launceston Church Grammar School and has similar memories of using the cookbook. "It's been a great, trusted recipe book, all of the recipes have been tested, which is really good to know. I still use the book as a reference in my classes," she said. "It's almost 90 years old and it's still a Tasmanian classic." "All the recipes are heart-warming, easy to understand and the ingredients aren't expensive for families." Janelle said one reason for its continued popularity over the years is people referring back to it to find an old recipe their grandparents or relatives used to make. "If people have memories of certain meals they ate when they were younger, for example, this book would probably be a good starting point to find out how it was made," she said. According to the Department of Education, the Central Cookery Book has been updated since it was first published by a group of Tasmanian teachers. The Department said it's no longer a set text in classrooms but is referred to along with a range of other books and online resources. Adriana Taylor, from the Country Women's Association, said it's understandable people are reaching for easy and familiar recipes during the pandemic. "There's a level of comfort in home cooking, using fresh produce from your garden and making a meal to share with your family or friends is really special," she said. "I hope people will have a lot more confidence in themselves once COVID-19 ends, in being able to get an easy meal ready quickly and easily and also just things like breakfasts, anyone can really do smashed avocado on toast." "Now people will be able to make decent pasta and pasta sauces. I hope people will continue to cook at home." Mother-of-two Cassandra Sheehan is one of many Tasmanians who've been spending more time cooking. "I used to bake before this period but we've definitely been doing more recently," she said. "My daughter wanted to make a Boston bun like the bakery, so we did a Boston bun, we've done bread, home-made pizza bases, things for the kids' lunches: muffins, cakes, a lot of experimenting. It's been fun, the kids love it!" "I think everyone should give it a go, you get a lot of enjoyment out of it. I do still call mum and ask 'how do you do such-and-such?', but that's all part of it." Alice Christina Irvine was born in the mining town of Mathinna in 1879. According to records from the Tasmanian Honour Roll of Women, she was educated at Mangana State School and began her career as a teacher at Mathinna State School in 1897. In 1906, Alice attended the Melbourne Training College as a cookery student and in 1926 attended the Emily MacPherson College of Domestic Economy in Melbourne. Upon her return to Tasmania, Alice started writing a text for cookery education. First published around 1930, the Central Cookery Book was intended for use in Tasmanian domestic science classes. It's now become one of the most published and widely utilised texts in Tasmania. Miss Irvine died in November 1940 from cancer. She was inducted into the Tasmanian Honour Roll of Women in 2009 for services to Education and Training. 
Beef producers face 'long-term uncertainty' as coronavirus hits export market, but domestic demand surges
Beef is among the growing list of industries dealing with ramifications of the coronavirus, with the sector experiencing export bans, increased freight costs and a significant drop in overseas demand. AgForce says there has been a noticeable shift in the perception of the agricultural sector in favour of producers and farmers Josie and Blair Angus run 35,000 head of cattle on their property near Moranbah, 200 kilometres south-west of Mackay in central Queensland. They sell beef to 30 countries across the world. "Uncertainty is probably the best way to describe it  and volatility," Ms Angus said. "We had the hunger games at the start, where domestically the retail demand appeared insatiable, and I guess we've obviously had chain disruptions around air trade internationally. "It's been patchy and interesting and I think, now moving forward, the uncertainty is probably the biggest factor." The abattoir where the Anguses were sending some of their stock was one of the four impacted by China's banned exports, but that was not the only market affecting their business.  The couple supply beef to restaurants, butchers and wholesalers across Australia and overseas. "We've seen massive impacts in the Middle East, for instance, where we had a focus on the UAE and Dubai and such a heavy tourist influenced economy," Ms Angus said. "We've seen a massive drop-off in demand there. "Now we've just got that longer-term bit of uncertainty; where's this all going to end?" In a silver lining to the pandemic, domestic demand for beef has surged. Peter Boodle is a butcher in Rockhampton and he lost 50 per cent of trade to local restaurants and cafes when they were forced to shut their doors.  But consistent demand to put food on the table has turned that around. "Since the coronavirus started we were a little bit worried  but we're actually up in sales," Mr Boodle said. "Even though our wholesale and restaurant trade is down 50 per cent, our retail is up 50 [per cent] as well. "We're actually doing better than what we were before coronavirus started." Mr Boodle put the increase in retail demand down to people getting more creative in the kitchen as they looked to make nicer meals at home. "They're becoming their own chefs, they're asking for better cuts," he said. "Our customer count's probably up around 400 customers a week." Terry Nolan is the director of a cattle processing facility near Gympie in south-east Queensland. He said he has seen a strong increase in business because of the coronavirus restrictions. "In our business about 60 to 70 per cent is for the Australian and domestic market and Australian retail trade," Mr Nolan said. "There's an increase in retail trade, and it's probably no surprise that people out here have sought comfort food. "I would say, in those first two weeks of lockdown [from] mid-March to [the] end of March, some retailers would have doubled their sale of meat which is a great story for the beef industry." He said a lot of producers have not felt the brunt of the pandemic yet because of the length of the supply chain in the cattle industry. "To some degree they've been insulated to the COVID effect," Mr Nolan said. "There may be a lag time down the track and who knows with the talk of China. "Hopefully that's only [a] temporary suspension of those plants and we can be back going there in six months. "But it's a long and complex supply chain and lots of people are impacted at different times." AgForce cattle board chair, Will Wilson, said the industry was in a rebuild phase following drought, meaning the current situation was good for producers. "It's a supply and demand market  so while we're building supply, the demand is high and that's been noticeable and good for producers as far as value proposition goes," he said. Mr Wilson says while the international export industry is uncertain, producers are taking it as it comes. "At the end of the day it's just a volatile situation for [the] market so we'll see what happens in the future," he said. Mr Wilson said another positive of the pandemic for the agricultural sector has been a shift in perception of the industry from the broader community. "It really seems now people are concerned about where their next feed is going to come from and what's important to them," he said. "As an industry it's no secret that we've been struggling to deliver the message that we do care about our land and our animals  this has been a real assistance in getting that message across. "You actually get an opportunity to prove you are doing your best to feed the world, and look after the animals and the land." 
Muslims struggling through coronavirus helped with food parcels during Ramadan
For many families, the evening meal during the month of Ramadan is a time of joy and reflection spent with friends and family.  Prayers at packed mosques, warm hugs and mouth-watering foods a traditional centrepiece.  Muslims across Australia are breaking their day-long fasts differently this year because of coronavirus  and a food deployment operation is helping members of the community who are struggling.  Yusra Metwally is a few hours into her fast as she packs eggs into a food hamper going out with others to Western Sydney suburbs.  The box is halal-friendly and specifically designed for Muslim communities. Ms Metwally knows some will be using this food to celebrate their own iftars  the evening meal in which Muslims end their daily Ramadan fast. "I'm experiencing Ramadan for the first time in isolation and it's been so strange because usually it's such a social time where you break your fast with others.  "But I've come to terms with a changed Ramadan. While we've lost the usual elements like the mosques and socialisation  we haven't lost that sense of community.  Ms Metwally is a volunteer at Addison Road Community Centre Organisation (ARCCO) in Marrickville which seven weeks ago turned into a major food deployment operation to reach vulnerable community members during the COVID-19 crisis.  The community hall which used to hold social functions is now full of fresh fruit and vegetables, refrigerators of eggs and milk and hundreds of cans.  It works like clockwork with volunteers physically distanced at each station as food is packed, labelled, and delivered into vans. Chief Executive of ARCCO Rosanna Barbero is comfortable with managing big-picture logistics in crisis.  She's worked for the United Nations and Oxfam aid operations across the Middle East, Asia and Africa for the last three decades.  "In a couple of hours we repurposed the empty Addison Road community hall into the headquarters  because we knew we'd have to deploy food immediately because people would be in need.  "Particularly those people who have fallen through the cracks or lost jobs." ARCCO has no government funding  and relies on donations and volunteers during this pandemic.  It is focused on servicing gaps in the stimulus packages  targeting refugee and asylum-seeker communities, international students, sex workers and even tourists.  It has been working in food security since 2015 but never quite at this scale.  "This definitely mirrors deployment operations I've worked on," Ms Barbero said. The boxes that Ms Metwally packed are in a van parked in Belmore.  Syeda Shah, a mother of five is one of the first to receive one.  Ms Shah and her family are asylum seekers from northern Pakistan  fleeing persecution for their religion in which the minority Shia-Muslim group are targeted. For the family who live in Georges Hall, food security has always been an issue in their seven years in Australia on bridging visas with minimal government support.  However, the worry to feed her kids this Ramadan increased as prices went up or stock sold quickly in their local grocery stores due to the crisis.  "It's always a big month for Muslims but we can't afford most things," Ms Shah said. "But right now, it's even harder as most prices are up for spices, for rice."  Addison Road was a lifeline. Particularly as extra costs pile up like pre-paid data packs for her husband and their children to rely on to complete studies from home.  They cannot afford a monthly internet plan.  "It's really helped. We've got plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables, and tinned food," Ms Shah said. "Without this we don't have access to fruits and veggies. This the fruit we put in my kids' lunchboxes the days they go to school." But what Ms Shah loves most is the fact she's always made to feel resilient. "They respect everyone. When they give food they give it with love.  "They never use words like poor or that they're helping 'people like us' which charities often use." While she misses the social gatherings  the work the organisation is doing has embodied the values of Ramadan she holds close.  "Fasting in the time of Ramadan is important as you can understand hunger and the stress of other people who may not have enough food.  "What they're doing here is so important."  
How Victoria's coronavirus restrictions will change from June
Victorians are being told that from next month, the message is shifting from "stay home" to "stay safe", as a raft of coronavirus restrictions ease. But the relaxed restrictions will not change the health advice to maintain a 1.5 metre distance from others, avoid hugging and kissing where possible, and give space to those around you. And those who are vulnerable, such as Victorians over 70, or those with chronic health conditions, are still being urged to think carefully about limiting their interactions in order to reduce the risk of infection. Premier Daniel Andrews has also made clear the changes will only proceed if every Victorian with the slightest of symptoms continues to be tested to maintain what he says are "among the highest test rates in the world". With that in mind, this is what the path out of restrictions for Australia's second most-populous state will look like. While lots of things are loosening up, the direction for every Victorian who is able to work from home to do so remains, at least for the rest of June. "If we have literally hundreds and hundreds of thousands of people returning to office blocks, pressing lift buttons, sharing the kitchen, using common spaces, bathrooms and other spaces like that, then we will simply have this virus get away from us," Mr Andrews said. "It is the greatest risk to a second wave and then all that we're trying to avoid  the notion of having to reimpose some of these rules." While the Premier acknowledged continuing to work from home would be frustrating and difficult for some businesses, Chief Health Officer Brett Sutton said others had discovered its silver lining. He encouraged businesses to think about what they could do with their IT infrastructure or organisation to make working from home sustainable. From June 1, Victorians will be able to have 20 people under the roofs of their homes  but that includes those who live there. So, for example, a family of three will be able to host 17 people in their house. And gatherings outside, such as picnics, will be able to include up to 20 people as well. The Premier has urged people remain mindful of the pandemic and the need for physical distancing. "In all your activities, be considered, be cautious, use your common sense," Mr Andrews said. The limit on the number of people allowed at house inspections and auctions will also rise from 10 to 20, with real estate agents required to keep track of the number of attendees and their contact details. With the bushfires and the pandemic having hammered Victoria's tourism economy, the latest easing of restrictions holds good news, with overnight stays at accommodation and private residences allowed from June 1. That extends to campgrounds and caravan parks, where people will be able to pitch a tent and camp overnight once again. But don't expect communal facilities like kitchens or bathrooms to be available. They'll remain closed to reduce the transmission risk presented by shared spaces. A range of cultural spaces will be allowed to reopen across the month, starting with galleries, museums, drive-in cinemas and historic sites from June 1. Zoos, outdoor amusement parks, libraries, youth centres and community facilities will also be given the green light from the start of the month. Beauty and personal care services like nail salons, spas and tattoo parlours will also reopen, but they will be required to keep the contact details of each customer. All of these places will need to follow physical-distancing directions and a limit of 20 patrons "per space" will apply. Professor Sutton defined a "space" like this: "It's largely about a single, undivided space where you can manage the flow of people going in and out." But the overriding rule of 4 square metres of space per customer still applies, so it's possible some smaller venues won't be able to host the full 20 people. If you're keen to visit Melbourne Zoo, Healesville Sanctuary or Werribee Open Range Zoo, you'll need to plan ahead. They announced they'll be restricting entry tickets to online purchases so they can cap attendance at their zoos to 2,000, 1,500 and 1,000 respectively. So if you turn up without buying ahead, you could be turned away at the gate if they're already at capacity. And the enclosed indoor areas such as the reptile and nocturnal houses will remain closed. If all goes according to plan, on June 22 that limit will be raised to 50 people, with cinemas and theatres finally able to open their doors again. The Premier has stressed coronavirus testing results will inform the easing of restrictions at every step of the way, with a focus on avoiding a scenario where a liberty is offered to businesses that then has to be taken back. "The more people that get tested, the more options we have, to not make changes based on guesswork, but instead to make changes based on what the data is telling us," he said. It's getting easier for Victorians to get out and about for different kinds of exercise, starting with the reopening of public playgrounds and outdoor gym equipment from Tuesday, the same day state schools will welcome back the first wave of students to classrooms. Community sport will be able to run from June 1 provided it's held outdoors or with no more than 20 people in undivided spaces, is non-contact and people are able to play while respecting 1.5 metre physical distancing. Swimming pools will also be able to open, but with that limit of 20 people in place. If community transmission rates remain low and testing rates high, indoor gyms and fitness centres will be able to open their doors again on June 22, with no more than 20 people per space and up to 10 people involved in a group or activity at any one time. June 22 is also the date Victorians (and anyone from interstate for that matter) should be able to take to the state's ski slopes, which are set for a bumper season of snow this year. The limiton funeral attendees has been tough, which may be why it's being relaxed fastest, with up to 50 mourners allowed at funerals from June 1. For weddings, up to 20 people will be allowed, plus the celebrant and couple. The same limit of 20 people will apply to "private worship or small religious ceremonies", in addition to those required to perform the service. While the Government has already announced that restaurants, cafes and the dining section of pubs will be able to reopen from June 1 with a 20-person limit (rising to 50 on June 22), bars and clubs are proving more of a challenge. A city's signature nightlife culture is on life support, with some landmark Melbourne venues already pulling the plug and many more expected to go the same way. "I think indoor gatherings of that nature, where it's not table service, it's  very challenging to maintain social distance and where you've got alcohol being consumed  let's be clear  at a higher level than it might be in other settings  I think that those types of venues are going to be the very last venues to reopen," Mr Andrews said. "They would have to look very, very different and then it'll be a matter of us engaging with that sector to have a conversation with them about whether they want to open up with those rules." If you're after more information, the Department of Health and Human Services has set up a page that breaks this all down in much more detail. 
Coronavirus leaves Sydney man still struggling for breath two months after being discharged
David Allen has been in choirs since he was three years old. Now, the coronavirus survivor struggles to sing at all and runs out of air mid-line. The 32-year-old audiologist from Epping, in Sydney's north-west, was infected with COVID-19 while travelling in Belgium in early March. Doctors say his voice will return but two months after being cleared of the virus, David says he still struggles daily with fatigue and shortness of breath. "There is this moment where every time I push myself beyond what I can to that slightly breathless point, there is this just grinding fear that maybe the next breath won't actually come," he says. Doctors have told him it is normal for a recovery from pneumonia to be about four to six months as the damaged lung linings fix themselves, and encouraged him to keep up singing and walking to build strength. Earlier this month, he wrote about his recovery on social media and says he was inundated with people sharing similar stories of struggling and feeling like they had no-one to talk to.  "It really connected with a lot of people," he says. "The most heartbreaking part of it was the number of people who said 'I know, this is me, this is my experience'. "The discourse is very much about once you are  quote-unquote  'recovered', that somehow your life goes back to normal, and it really doesn't," David says. "We haven't spoken about that story because it's scary, you know? It's really, really scary being a 32-year-old who is unable to walk around the park." David contracted coronavirus at a dance party and admits he was "quite naive" at the time about the risk of infection.  When he got back to Sydney, he had a few days off for jet lag when news emerged of infections from the party and he tested positive on March 16 despite not having any symptoms at that stage.  Two days later, he started having trouble breathing, severe headaches, chills and fatigue. It was like, he says, having flu multiple times over. NSW went into lockdown two days before David was cleared by NSW Health on March 25. By March 27, NSW saw its largest daily case spike to date with 212 confirmed COVID-19 infections. While David was never admitted to hospital for COVID-19, one day, feeling overwhelmed by the isolation and a shortness of breath, he had an anxiety attack, was briefly hospitalised for monitoring and is now on a mental-health plan.  David knows he is fortunate to have emerged at all from the suffocating fog of COVID-19 but says it is not really cause for celebration.  "It's hard to feel lucky when we're talking about the statistics," he says. "I don't feel particularly lucky. I feel grief for so many people who have become sick and those who have died or have ongoing disability." He says what is important to think about is that this is a collective story of trauma and grief for the loss of normal life. "Everybody is traumatised, everybody is hurting," he says. "The big thing that really stands out to me is there's a lot of discussion about getting back to normal. "We need an acknowledgement, a change in our language that it's not about going back to what it was before. It's not about reopening the country, it's about opening it in a new way.  "We are never going back to normal." Professor Tania Sorrell is director of the Marie Bashir Institute for Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity at the University of Sydney and says patients will need to be followed for a long time to fully understand COVID-19 recovery.  "We are really trying very hard to determine exactly when the long-term consequences are and we will need to follow patients for up to two years to be confident that we can be really clear about it," she says.  "I'm certainly aware of individual patients who seem to feel well one day and feel terrible the next, or they look as though they're improving and suddenly there seems to be a relapse," she says. In addition to impacts on the body, it's important to bear in mind mental health, too, she says.  "It's a little bit like post-traumatic stress disorder that patients or individuals can suffer if they've been to war or in any other really stressful condition.  "Under those circumstances, hospitals typically do have support processes for their patients after discharge, which include psychological assessment, social worker assessment as well as follow-up by various clinicians." She said long-term follow-up clinics are being set up and GPs are also undertaking follow-ups. There's also access to support processes such as psychological or social-worker assessment. She says, in general, rest is the best therapy and people like David Allen are doing the right thing by exercising without overdoing it. She says while some analogies can be drawn with other diseases, COVID-19 remains uncharted territory. "We are learning about this  it's a new disease, and that's why as a health care profession we want to keep a very close eye on our patients to make sure that we're not missing something and that we can offer the best support and care that we can." 
Coronavirus means Australia's major events industry will never be the same again
Peter Jones looks at the whiteboard in his North Melbourne office that  ironically, now  he put up just a couple of months ago to visualise his frantic year ahead. "Olympic dinner, gone. Committee for Melbourne event, gone. Starry Night  gone," he says as he places a cross against his list of cancellations. A stalwart of the major events industry, Mr Jones says the pandemic has been "the worst thing you could ever imagine in your wildest dreams for the events industry as a whole". Until now, the authorities' focus has been on reuniting households and allowing small gatherings. But Australia's iconic major events and functions are, at this stage, on hold indefinitely, with no federal guidelines as to how they will be able to return. Industry insiders fear it will be early next year before the multi-billion-dollar industry can start to revive. It's estimated cancellations of both major events and business events will account for a $35 billion loss to the economy in 12 months and more than 92,000 jobs. Mr Jones considers the fate of the AFL parade he's organised for 24 years. "You're talking about an event that takes about eight months to plan, has about two and a half thousand people that are involved in putting it together, the hiring, all of the infrastructure that goes into it, it's broadcast on TV  you can't say, well, we're going to do half of that," he says. Mr Jones says when he recently asked the City of Melbourne for a permit for the parade, "I think they laughed at me". "I was only half joking, knowing what the response would be. They're not in a position to [give a permit]." He says it could be months before those sort of events can happen. "New Year's Eve for councils would have to be a big issue," he says. "We're talking into January, February and March next year of events that may not happen in the same way." He fears many smaller operators in the industry will not be able to ride out the crisis. "We will never ever go back to what we were. And as an industry, we need to adapt." Andrew Westacott was in the unenviable position of presiding over the first major event in Australia to be sucked into the pandemic's vortex: the complex multinational behemoth that is the Formula 1 Grand Prix. Over a number of days before the March event, it was mired in confusion and controversy as drivers wondered aloud why the race was going ahead. Some pulled the pin and flew out, hours before angry fans were eventually told of the cancellation as they gathered outside Albert Park gates on Friday, March 13 (Mr Westacott remembers the date with a slight raise of his eyebrows), just two days ahead of the race. "We were unaware that several of the drivers had caught early morning flights out of Australia," Mr Westacott says in his first on-camera interview since that time. "The decision actually hadn't been officially made by the FAA in Formula One and ourselves until early that morning. "So that took us by surprise, but that was that changing nature of what was happening on many, many different fronts." Mr Westacott had been juggling his international bosses, commercial rightsholders, state and federal health authorities and Australian Border Force. "There were a lot of inputs," he says. Still, weeks later, he says the decision-making was sound. "I actually don't think anything went wrong   [but] I still send our apologies to the fans who had travelled so, so many distances," he says. "I think we made the right decision at the right time." He's upbeat that next year's event will go ahead in some form. "With an open-air park on a very, very large footprint, we actually probably have a lot of benefits over some enclosed spaces," he says. "But there are also some challenges when it comes to temporary infrastructure." Mr Westacott says they extended the bump-out of the event for the contractors who were doing it tough, and are still working their way through refunds and credits for disappointed fans. When asked if he would, like his counterparts at the Australian Open, consider a scenario inviting New Zealand fans over if the "travel bubble" with Australia proceeds, he laughs: "I don't disagree with that sort of principle. One of the things I've always said is that we steal shamelessly." Tennis Australia CEO Craig Tiley watched the unfolding mess at the Grand Prix, knowing he had avoided the viral bullet by mere weeks. "I spoke to Andrew [Westacott] following it. And we felt for Formula One and the organisation, because no one knew," he says. "They were just trying to do what they felt was the best thing at that point in time, not knowing how quickly this thing was moving. "It was heavily criticised for it, but  it totally turned out to be the right decision." Mr Tiley says there are lessons from the Grand Prix's perfect storm of misfortune. "One of the learnings that we have taken from that, and we did this with our organisation, is we've tried to make a decision as early as possible," he says. "And not really knowing if it's the right decision, but making sure that is the best decision for that moment in time." Mr Tiley believes his team was in a better position to handle uncontrollable situations than it might have been, having had its own brush with a natural disaster  choking smoke from bushfires at January's event. Still, he says: "We have no baseline, and no sport and no government has a baseline, on how to manage [these crises]." Tennis Australia is lucky too, to have made the relatively uncommon investment in pandemic insurance, although that runs out in July. The Grand Prix showed the high stakes of a mishandled cancellation and the risks to public confidence and health if a restart is bungled are immense. Mr Tiley says the key will be establishing trust through honest communication with the public. "It has to be authentic, has to be transparent," he says. "I think that's really important, not just for sport, but for everyone to do, because from a leadership point of view, the moment you don't become believable, then you can't get anything done." While Mr Tiley says professional sports are sharing their strategies about how to navigate the murky months ahead, event planner Peter Jones says the wider industry needs to do more. "The industry has actually got to get together for the first time like it probably hasn't [before], and be able to go out with a set of guidelines saying this is the way we will operate," he says. "And that's then going to be communicated to the general public." Anne Jamieson, vice-president of the Victorian Tourism Industry Council, says governments also need to come to the party more when it comes to business events. They are the large conferences, gala dinners, charity events, that are a similarly huge economic driver as major events  bringing in $3.4 billion in Victoria alone, versus $2.5 billion by major events  but without the public profile. "We'd probably like to see a little bit more support come from government," Ms Jamieson says. "I think that we need to be careful that [the sector] doesn't get left behind." And coming back, she says, won't be straightforward. "Somebody's going to have to take the step to actually run an event and test everything that needs to be done from a health and safety perspective, from how they're going to manage delegates, how they're going to manage registrations, et cetera," she says. "They're probably going to have to have an action plan in place for every single event from a health and safety perspective, and actually have a ground crew running every day to make sure that they're mitigating and managing people that are potentially not complying to what they actually need to comply to." Ms Jamieson and Mr Jones fear for the future of networking events, where no streaming platform can replace the buzz and connection that comes with pre-COVID-19 mingling. Mr Jones says to get ready for public events to change forever. "I can still see in years to come, people being checked for health. "People can check for names, where they've been, maybe there is going to be an app that says, 'I've been to the football, I've been here'  that will happen, because we will never ever go back to what we were." 
Dominic Cummings, Boris Johnson adviser and Brexit architect, refuses to resign over lockdown travel during coronavirus
UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson's senior adviser Dominic Cummings is fighting for his job after flouting the Government's coronavirus lockdown rules. Mr Johnson is standing by Mr Cummings despite calls from within his own Conservative Party for the aide to be dismissed for driving 250 miles (400 kilometres) during the coronavirus lockdown. Mr Cummings, one of the key figures in the 2016 Brexit campaign, came under pressure when newspapers reported he had travelled from London to northern England at the end of March, when his wife was ill with COVID-19 symptoms during a nationwide lockdown. Mr Johnson's office said in a statement that Mr Cummings made the trip because his wife was showing coronavirus symptoms, he thought he was likely to also get sick, and his parents had offered to help look after the couple's young son. The statement said Mr Cummings stayed in a house "near to but separate from" his extended family in Durham. The UK's lockdown stipulated that people should remain at home, leaving only for essential local errands and exercise. In a message to the nation on March 23, Mr Johnson said: "From this evening I must give the British people a very simple instruction  you must stay at home". Mr Cummings was seen in London on March 27 but travelled to Durham at some time between then and March 31, according to the BBC. Mr Cummings, who has repeatedly refused to resign, entered 10 Downing Street on Sunday (local time) after some Tory MPs demanded he quit. "It is intolerable that Boris's Government is losing so much political capital," MP Steve Baker wrote on Twitter. "Dominic Cummings must go." Fellow Conservative MPDamian Collinssaid Mr Cummings "has a track record of believing that the rules don't apply to him and treating the scrutiny that should come to anyone in a position of authority with contempt". "The Government would be better without him," he said. Mr Johnson, however, was steadfast in his support of Mr Cummings. "I conclude that in travelling to find the right kind of childcare, at the moment when both he and his wife were about to be incapacitated by coronavirus, and when he had no alternative  I think he followed the instincts of every father, and every parent. And I do not mark him down for that.," Mr Johnson said. "I believe that in every respect he has acted responsibly and legally." Keir Starmer, leader of the Opposition Labour Party, described Mr Johnson's decision to take no action against Mr Cummings as "an insult to the sacrifices made by the British people". "This was a test of the Prime Minister and he has failed it," Mr Starmer said in a statement. The UK Civil Service official Twitter feed posted and then deleted a message which appeared to be a criticism of Mr Johnson's stance. "Arrogant and offensive. Can you imagine working with these truth twisters?" Other prominent British figures have resigned after breaking lockdown rules. Epidemiologist Neil Ferguson quit as a member of the Government's scientific advisory group after he was visited at home by his girlfriend. Scotland's chief medical officer, Catherine Calderwood, stepped down after she was caught making two trips to her second home. On Saturday (local time), when asked if he would resign, Mr Cummings said he acted responsibly and legally and scolded reporters outside his house for getting the 2016 Brexit referendum wrong. "Obviously not," he said of resignation. "You guys are probably all about as right about that as you were about Brexit: do you remember how right you all were about that?" Mr Cummings said. With a total of 260,916 confirmed cases and 36,875 dead, the United Kingdom has the worst official COVID-19 death toll in Europe ABC/Reuters 
Life in coronavirus lockdown brings added heartache for palliative care patients
Kim Bieber broke social and physical distancing rules a few weeks ago and has no regrets. Some might argue she had no choice. "I needed to feel their presence," she says. "My children, my grandchildren. To hold them and tell them I love them." Ms Bieber has terminal cancer and is receiving palliative care. She has been told she has about a week or ten days to live. "It could've been the last time. Every time could be the last time," she says. For several months, the 61-year-old had been enforcing strict social distancing rules. Few people were allowed inside her Fitzroy home in Melbourne's inner north-east, which is decorated with colourful artwork painted by her three grandchildren. The furniture was also moved to ensure that when a nurse or doctor visited, people were kept metres apart. She had been undergoing cancer treatment since Christmas and catching COVID-19, or even the common cold, could have been a death sentence. "We were keeping stricter rules than what you'd see at the supermarket or Queen Victoria Market," she says. "Plus, I didn't want to upset Dan Andrews," she jokes. Even though she needs help from her husband Rafael to walk a few steps, and her speech can be slow, her mind is still quick. But she doesn't joke about how painful isolation from her family has been, as the cancer spread to her brain and the days became shorter and colder. "April was very grey. I hadn't seen my family for months  It was quite a lonely time," she says. "We did Facetime or things like that. It wasn't the same." Thousands of people receiving palliative care in Australia are getting less contact with others, including their nurses, because of the coronavirus restrictions. Anne Myers has been a palliative care nurse with Melbourne City Mission for 14 years. "This is a very difficult situation for people," she says.  "It is bringing in extra ethical and moral decisions for people. What's the best thing to do for a loved one?  "Especially in a PCU [Palliative Care Unit] where only one [a family member] may be allowed to go in." Ms Myers says face-to-face home visits are now only for terminal patients in home care and only then if the family has been screened for coronavirus and if physical-distancing measures are in place. But she says when it comes to treating the dying, and consoling a family, doing it at a distance is difficult. "Eighty per cent of our clients now are probably getting phone calls, whereas before 80 per cent [were] getting visits," she says. "Our role is our relationships with our clients. All that non-verbal stuff  we miss all that and you realise, when you don't have that face-to-face, how needed that is." Ms Bieber makes light of how hard social distancing has been in the grand scheme of things. She says being an "educated white woman" in inner-city Melbourne has given her certain privileges, including receiving palliative care at home. "I have worked with Holocaust survivors," the former psychotherapist says. "I have worked with asylum seekers, refugees. COVID-19 is pretty easy really." She even says having terminal cancer has some positives. Knowing she is dying has allowed her to be more aggressive with financial institutions that she had previously struggled with. "One day someone said to me, 'Just get your husband to do that,' and I had to say, 'Look, I'm dying of brain cancer and he's got dementia. You just need to sort it," she says. "I guess sometimes we need to be more assertive than we would otherwise want," she says, laughing. With that newfound assertiveness, Ms Bieber organised a visit from her children and grandchildren. The Fitzroy Police Station was called and told people were coming inside her home and why. "I didn't want my family to get fined for something they couldn't afford," she says. "They [the police] didn't quite say, 'Do whatever you like, love'  but that was the sentiment." On a cold day in April, she saw her family again and has been able to see them a few times since. "I just hold them. I just told them I love them," she says. "And I hold my daughter, and we tell stories about our life together and it is a celebration really. "It was like a filling up the soul again." While Kim Bieber can't move much, she says her children do it for her when they visit. "One of my grandchildren does flips and shows me," she says. "One of my grandchildren has just become a Cub, and I talk to her all about those things." "The other is very interested in football. God knows why, really. "They know I'm going to die, and they send me little messages in the morning, like: 'Guess what Grandma? I love you'. "It's sad. There is sadness, but there is a joy. A joy in being able to say goodbye.  "I have been very fortunate." Ms Bieber says there is a lesson for everyone now they have experienced their own lockdown and what it feels like. "We should be more sensitive to what goes on for people who are isolated or unwell, or elderly, or disabled in a way," she says. "That we can be kinder and more compassionate." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. 
Coronavirus Australia news: 6 million people have now downloaded the COVIDSafe tracing app, restrictions easing further in Victoria and NSW, as it happened
Chief Nursing and Midwifery Officer Alison McMillan says more than 6 million Australians have downloaded the Government's coronavirus contact tracing app. Meanwhile, Victoria and New South Wales are both easing restrictions further, with changes to come into place from next week. Look back on Sunday's events as they unfolded. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery Thanks for following along for another day of COVID-19-related news, everyone. The live blog will of course be back in the morning. And in the meantime, we'll keep adding the latest to our coronavirus update story overnight, so that's the article to read for the biggest developments as they happen. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery Chief Minister Michael Gunner said the Biosecurity Act  limiting travel to remote communities  would be removed almost two weeks ahead of schedule after consultation with land councils and traditional owners. For the full story, head here. By Yasmin Jeffery Clive Palmer will lodge documents with the High Court this week, arguing Western Australia's border closure is unconstitutional, as the state again recorded no new cases of COVID-19, AAP reports. Mr Palmer wanted to visit WA for meetings with businesspeople, Senator Mathias Cormann and potential 2021 state election candidates for his United Australia Party, but was rejected due to coronavirus restrictions. "Closing down the border is not only an act of stupidity by WA Premier Mark McGowan, but it is against the Australian constitution and I am confident the High Court will see it that way as well," Mr Palmer said in a statement on Sunday. "The WA premier needs to act now to ensure a successful future beyond COVID-19 by opening his borders to allow trade and travel from Australian states into WA. "It is a matter of national importance that the borders be open." Mr Palmer said he would lodge the legal documents on Monday and hoped to have a directions hearing in the High Court by the end of the week. Mr McGowan said on Friday that he endorsed the WA police commissioner's decision not to grant Mr Palmer an exemption from the travel ban. The premier has continued to insist WA's interstate borders will remain closed for months, despite criticism from some, including NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian. Audience comment by Agreed I agree with So Sad - where's the petition for journos to at least ask the CMOs how their day is going?  
Brazil is on track to become one of the countries hit worst by coronavirus. This is where they went wrong
The people of Paradise City, Sao Paulo's second biggest favela, are used to being ignored by government. The shanty-town ("Paraisopolis" in the local tongue) sprang up in the shadows of the luxury apartment complexes of nearby Morumbi, one of the city's most affluent suburbs. But its 100,000 residents have never had access to proper healthcare, education or sanitation. So, when the coronavirus started creeping through the tightly packed alleys, Gilson Rodrigues knew he had to take matters into his own hands. "It is a question of saving lives," he told ABC. Through crowdfunding and a few generous private donations, the community leader hired three private ambulances and eight medical professionals to cope with the looming emergency. "Things are getting serious," he said. "Many people don't exactly understand what is happening.  "People continue walking in the streets as if the virus hasn't arrived in our community, as if the virus was only affecting rich people who travelled outside the country." With thousands of residents now reportedly showing symptoms, there's little doubt the virus is here. The thousands of freshly dug graves in Sao Paolo's cemeteries paint a jarring picture of what comes next. Back in February, this was Julio Croda's worst-case scenario. As the Health Ministry's chief infectious disease advisor, it was his job to coordinate Brazil's coronavirus response. He developed a detailed policy on social distancing which was fiercely rejected by the President, Jair Bolsonaro. Then he was forced to resign. "During this time, you had a fight between [Health] Minister Mandetta and President Bolsonaro about this recommendation  For this reason, I decided to leave the Government," Dr Croda told ABC. "[It was] very hard because I want to help. I want to support public health." Three weeks later, his former boss, health minister Luiz Henrique Mandetta, was fired. The minister who replaced him, Nelson Teich, resigned a month after that. "The COVID-19 pandemic has become a political issue. This is the problem," said Dr Croda. Populist President Jair Bolsonaro has earned the nickname "Trump of the Tropics" for his populist zeal and anti-science approach to government. Indeed, his approach to the pandemic has often echoed that of the US President. He downplayed COVID-19 for months, calling it "a little flu" that Brazilians were uniquely suited to overcome. He's touted the unproven and potentially dangerous anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine as effective protection against the virus, noting the US President was taking it preventatively. He demanded all but the elderly ignore the state governments' social isolation restrictions, even attending anti-lockdown protests in person to insist nothing was more important than the economy. When the President sacked his health minister in April, he said: "Mandetta's vision was that of health, of life. Mine is more than life, it includes the economy, jobs." One highly respected British medical journal, The Lancet, called Bolsonaro the "biggest threat" to public health in Brazil. In April, when the coronavirus death toll surpassed 5,000, the President told the press: "So what? I mourn, but what do you want me to do about it?" Now, more than 1,000 people are dying every day. Brazil is now the sixth country to register more than 20,000 deaths. And experts say the peak of the outbreak is still weeks away. Brazil's health system is not perfect. But it's not terrible either, especially when compared to other South American nations. Dr Croda, who now works at the Federal University of Mato Grosso do Sul, points to Brazil's successful containment of the Zika virus and HIV as evidence the country has the capacity to tackle public health crises. But in the case of coronavirus, he's witnessed first-hand a "perfect storm for bad outcomes". Social distancing wasn't adopted early enough, he says, and it's difficult to carry out effectively in the crowded favelas anyway. He points to the lack of testing capacity, even now, and the 80 cities that don't have any intensive care unit beds. "When you don't have ICU beds, the lethality associated with the disease increases too," he told ABC. That's already playing out. "The people [are dying] in front of the hospital without any support  They're dying on the street." Communities in the Amazon rainforest are particularly vulnerable. Dozens of Indigenous groups have been hit already. Health experts say the disease is spreading rapidly amongst the Indigenous populations there, including across the border to Peru and Colombia. Many hospitals are severely understaffed, under-resourced and far away from many isolated rainforest communities. Critical COVID-19 patients are being evacuated by plane to the only intensive care units in the vast region, but services are severely stretched. The Mayor of Manaus called what was happening to his people a "crime against humanity". "I fear genocide and I want to denounce this thing to the whole world. We have here a government that does not care about the lives of the Indians." Back in Paradise City, Gilson Rodrigues is coordinating a group of volunteers he calls "street presidents". Two "presidents" are assigned for every 50 coronavirus cases, taking care of sick families and encouraging them to stay home. Gilson has also organised food parcels for those in need and established two isolation shelters. He continues to spread the message about social distancing. "We need to show people why they need to stay home because if they end up in hospital, the respiratory machines won't be there to help them. And they will die." 
Has coronavirus killed our chance to stop climate change getting worse, or given us a opportunity to act?
Ian Dunlop worries about his grandchildren. He worries time is running out. "We run the risk within the next probably five to 10 years, that we may trigger irreversible tipping points in the climate system," he says. He used to be a fossil fuel industry executive. Now he advocates for action on climate change. Global warming of 1.5 degrees Celsius in the next 20 years or so is essentially baked in, according to the UN's climate body  and Ian fears it won't stop there. "Three degrees Celsius, the best national security experts in the world consider will be social chaos," he says. "You can already see that and what happened with our bushfires. You look at major events like that and the social fabric really starts to break down very quickly." But he's not without hope. We're currently living through a life-changing, economy-twisting event: a global pandemic. Ian sees our response to coronavirus as a dress rehearsal for a much bigger challenge. "The only way we can really address climate change now is by some form of emergency action," he says. "We've left it too late to move through what people have been calling a graduating transition." When we're on the other side of this emergency, will we have the ability and will to refocus on climate change? Can we rebuild a fragile economy while taking action? Or will coronavirus push the issue of climate change to the backburner? Kim Sinclair also worries about her children, but it's not climate change that's front of mind. "I worry more about how they're going to put food on the table. Will they have a roof over their heads? What opportunities do they have in front of them?" She lives in Moranbah in central Queensland  where the mines are everything. Most of the mines produce coking coal for export steel markets. Kim worked at one of them for eight years, her husband still does. For Kim and the people she knows, there's a lot of fear around climate change and just what "urgent action" would entail. "There's nothing for us to put any of our hopes on. And unfortunately, very rarely are we consulted in the process," she says. "It feels like our livelihoods, our control, our self-esteem, our everyday lives, that's being taken away from us. "There's no plan, there's no structure, there's no discussion. People are just left hopeless and scared and wondering what the future holds." More than a thousand kilometres south on the banks of the Hunter River sits another mining town, Singleton. Mayor Sue Moore's job includes planning for a future her town doesn't want to talk about. "Climate change is not being discussed here. Coal is very much still part of this area," she says. The science on climate change has long been settled, and it's unequivocal: the climate is changing and human emissions of greenhouse gases are to blame. But that hasn't convinced Sue, who doesn't believe humans are causing the climate to change any faster. "I haven't seen anything that demonstrates to me that it is. That's my personal feeling." Coal mining directly accounts for 23 per cent of Singleton's workforce. The area is the biggest source of coal royalties for the NSW Government's coffers. Sue doesn't think mining will end any time soon  some mines in the area have the approvals for another 20 years at least. But in local government in the Hunter, "diversification" and "transformation" are important topics. Along with other councils in the region, Singleton is looking at opportunities like wind and solar. "There's so much potential there and we need to be ready for those opportunities as they present," Sue says. "The [community] doesn't want to talk about leaving coal  and we're not anti-coal by any means. But we want to be prepared for when coal may not be here any longer, which might be 50 years out." The UN's climate body says in order to stop global warming at 1.5C, the world must reach net zero emissions by 2050  meaning any new emissions into the atmosphere are removed or offset. More than 70 countries around the world, every Australian state and territory, the Federal Opposition, and industry groups like the Business Council of Australia all support the target. ClimateWorks Australia, which was co-founded by Monash University, has researched how Australia could get there. Its plan would require: CEO Anna Skarbek says the next decade is make or break. "It's the decade that emissions not only need to turn around but need to halve worldwide, so that we can then halve emissions again the following decade and reach net zero the decade thereafter," she says. "If we don't do that, we will have emitted, cumulatively, too many emissions along the way. So that even if you did reach net zero emissions at some point in the future, we've already put too much into the atmosphere to make warming tip over those limits." Anna says so much of the technology needed to achieve the cut in emissions already exists. "We can in fact leapfrog to a zero emissions alternative for most technologies in most sectors," she says. She says one massive project shows how Australia could become a clean energy superpower. We've known about climate change for decades, but we've done relatively little in response. In this special four-part series, Richard Aedy finds out why. With a proposed size of 6,500 square kilometres, the Asian Renewable Energy Hub in WA's Pilbara region would be more than half the size of Greater Sydney. CWP Renewables' Alex Hewitt says through wind and solar it will generate 15 gigawatts of power, with the capacity to expand to 26 gigawatts. That, he says, would make it the largest power project in the world. "We're going to use the electricity to make hydrogen, which then is an energy source which can go into all sorts of end uses  from cars and trucks and hydrogen fuel cells to industry, agriculture, heating, shipping fuels." Alex says moving away from fossil fuels for power is just one step. "The other sectors  agriculture, industry, transport, buildings  are much harder to decarbonise, and that's where hydrogen comes into play," he says. "When you start crunching some of the numbers on how much green hydrogen  as a fuel would be needed to decarbonise these sectors, the world will need not one of these big projects, but hundreds." The consortium behind the estimated $40 billion project is about to break ground, after being given the green light by Western Australia's environmental watchdog. Alex is confident the hub will be exporting and supplying the Australian market by 2027. The Grattan Institute believes hydrogen is key to creating a new multi-billion dollar industry  manufacturing and exporting low emission or so-called "green" steel. In a new report it says the industry could create tens of thousands of jobs in areas currently reliant on coal like Central Queensland and the Hunter Valley, but argues a flagship project should be invested in now. Emma Heard heads the Investor Group on Climate Change  its institutional investor members collectively manage $2 trillion in funds. Like Alex, she says what's crucial isn't just investing in new opportunities, but getting companies that are already operating to "decarbonise". "We can't just switch off the economy we've got, we have to actually get the economy we've got to reduce emissions," she says. "So in between investing in whole new climate solutions and technologies or not investing in carbon intensive or high-risk technologies and industries, there's the bulk of the economy, which is everything we do every day." She says the finance industry  including banks, insurers and super funds  is a critical part of that. "I'm optimistic about what I'm seeing is actually happening across the sector," she says. "Is it enough? No. Is it fast enough? No. Is it hugely important and really influential? Yes." An hour's drive from Sue's town of Singleton is a business that's ticking some of the boxes of ClimateWorks' plan for reaching net-zero. Molycop makes steel balls that are used in mining equipment to grind down rock by tumbling it in what the company's Brett Allen likens to a giant steel can. Rather than making the balls from scratch, they're made from melting down local scrap steel. "From an environmental perspective, it's about a quarter of the carbon footprint of a traditional steel making method," Brett says. It's still an energy intensive process. Brett says the company's recently improved its environmental credentials by negotiating to ensure part of the power they buy is from wind and solar. He says sourcing power from renewables and making recycled steel product gives Molycop a commercial advantage over overseas suppliers, because Australian mines are interested in reducing their overall carbon footprint. "Offsetting just a little more than half of our electricity lowers our carbon footprint even further to one eighth of that of a traditional steel-making process. So that, we feel, gives us a competitive advantage," he says. The challenge of reaching net zero emissions was already an enormous one before the global pandemic. Australia is now tentatively emerging from months of coronavirus lockdown. Nearly 600,000 people lost their job last month, the government's shovelling tens of billions of dollars into its JobKeeper program to keep more than 800,000 businesses afloat, borders remain closed and a road back to a sense of normality for many is still not clear. Many other countries are yet to reach this point, or are doing so with the burden of death tolls many times higher than ours. Second or third waves of outbreaks could be around the corner. Grattan Institute program director Danielle Wood is concerned the crisis will push action on climate change to the backburner. "We're going to come out the other side in a much weaker position from an economic perspective, certainly from a government budget perspective," she says. "A slow-burn issue like climate change, as big and as important as it is, might look less pressing in the scheme of things. "A real concern  is that this issue just gets pushed further and further into the future, and we know that we need to act soon rather than later." ClimateWorks CEO Anna Skarbeck says while an economic downturn does make the task harder, the response to the pandemic offers opportunities. "Governments, banks, companies will be looking for how to stimulate the economy on the other side of this pandemic," she says. She says there are "shovel ready projects" and new technology ready to be invested in which will help reduce carbon. She says the JobKeeper program also shows how the government can support vulnerable people in a global crisis. "I'm encouraged by what we're seeing around this community response to the pandemic, that we could take the principles of that to support workers who are affected by the climate change crisis." Business Council of Australia chief executive Jennifer Westacott says for many people the main worry right now is their job. "But this issue won't go away because of this terrible crisis we're in," she says. "It's important that as we think about the economic recovery, we think make sure that the transition we have to make in our energy mix, our energy consumption, our energy supply, our use of renewables, our investment in new technologies, is front and centre in that debate. "Because it's the opportunity that I'm worried about that we're going to miss, particularly in regional communities." Emma Heard says while the challenges of climate change and coronavirus are very different, the common element is resilience. "Our communities [are] integrating and thinking about these issues into the decisions that we make every day, and actually looking ahead and planning for what we know is coming and looking at how we can best respond to it," she says. "Time frames are different but the size of the challenge and the kinds of responses that we need to be implementing are quite, unfortunately, quite similar." Ian Dunlop says any response can't just come from Australia. He sees two ways the impact of climate change will play out globally. "It will either result in countries moving into an extremely defensive position where they put up the barriers, you end up with 'Fortress Australia'," he says. "We all try and optimise our own personal possessions or national possessions which means we will probably not get on top of the problem. "We will spiral downwards into what will end up being global collapse. "The alternative is we recognise that this is a problem that the entire world has and we cooperate to unprecedented degrees to get on top of it. "If we do that I think we have a chance of handling it, provided we treat it as a genuine emergency." Get more stories that go beyond the news cycle with our weekly newsletter. 
Coronavirus has left Australian women anxious, overworked, insecure  and worse off than men again
Political leaders have found it hard to resist the temptation of characterising the COVID-19 pandemic in military terms. Donald Trump  eager to self-apply a Rooseveltian shimmer in advance of November's scheduled presidential election  designated himself "a wartime President". "We are at war," declared France's Emmanuel Macron. "In this fight, we can be in no doubt that each and every one of us is directly enlisted," announced the British Prime Minister and Churchill nut Boris Johnson, shortly before he joined  unforgettably  his own casualty list. And sure  the parallels are superficially there. An attack by a foreign and inscrutable enemy. An apprehension of shared peril that's prompted a partial abandonment of entrenched political positions. A sharp uptick in backyard gardening and the home preparation of stodgy or indigestible loaves. Check, check, check. Just like wars, the virus is more deadly to men in the short term. While men and women appear to be at equal risk of catching COVID-19, men are  according to gender and health tracking agency Global Health 50/50  consistently more likely to die. In Australia, men are 57 per cent of the dead. In Italy, they're 61 per cent. (Why this disparity? When it first emerged in China, the best guess was that it had to do with Chinese men being enormously more dedicated cigarette smokers. But with men still dying faster in countries with negligible difference in smoking rates, the range of proffered theories has retreated, via immunology and hormones, to a generalised "we just don't know".) Women  again, just like in the global conflicts of our shared generational memory  are doing the bulk of the clean-up at home. And while high hopes were entertained for the crisis to bring new hordes of home-based workers and thus a significant rearrangement of workloads within the home itself, early signs are that the gendered patterns remain all too familiar. Professor Lyn Craig, famous for her research into the gendered division of labour in the home, is currently conducting a study with University of Melbourne colleague Brendan Churchill of behaviour among families in COVID-19 lockdown. Provisional results from the 2000-odd responses received so far indicate that for households with children, social isolation and school closures have created an extra six hours every day spent on caring for or supervising them. Of those six hours, the survey's responses suggest that for heterosexual nuclear families, around four hours are being done by women, and two by their male partners. Housework, meanwhile, is up around an hour and 10 minutes every day for women, but less than half an hour for men. "Shoving everybody into the house makes more work, especially for women," says Professor Craig. There is a weary familiarity to the two-to-one division of these additional child care hours; two to one is roughly the division of domestic work that women have shouldered in Australia for generations. Professor Craig says from a researcher's point of view, the COVID-19 crisis was a chance to observe how men would behave once they were able to work flexibly or from home, free from the constraints that traditional workplaces may impose on men in caring roles. "So far, we're not seeing that if you take away the constraints on men from the workplace that it just suddenly becomes more equal," she says. "There's something going on, but it's not just the structure. They certainly are participating more, but it's not rewriting the gender relativities." Of course, as the Workplace Gender Equality Agency points out in its recent paper Gendered Impacts of Covid-19 the demands on single parents  most of whom are women  are even greater. "With schools closed and other childcare arrangements, such as assistance from family and friends, discouraged due to social distancing measures, single mothers will have less ability to work and are at greater risk of poverty." With so much changing so quickly, it's hard to track the serpentine implications of this vast escalation in domestic workload, and the asymmetric style in which it is divided. But the question of whether lockdown has been a blessed opportunity for quiet work and contemplation in the home office or a nerve-jangling exercise in multi-tasking at the kitchen table more or less necessitating a 5pm glass of wine does appear to be a gendered one. "The next person who tweets about how productive Isaac Newton was while working from home gets my three-year-old posted to them!" threatened Sam Giles, a Birmingham-based fish palaeontologist, in March, in a viral tweet accompanied by a photo of her home office, in which the toddler on offer romps adorably in what is left of a cardboard box. The deputy editor of the British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, meanwhile, Elizabeth Hannon, found herself swamped with spirited responses when she tweeted this observation: "Negligible submissions to the journal from women in the last month. Never seen anything like it." Columbia volcanologist Einat Lev responded: "I just received an email from a male colleague of my same rank and family status (young kids). Except he has a full time stay at home wife. His email read 'This is a strange time but at least now, away from teaching, I can focus on writing'. Sigh & Scream." This is the gradually emerging spinoff from the extra domestic load: what are women doing less of outside the home, in this time of doing more within it? "Writing papers" is one small part of the answer. "Running for public office" may be another. In October, Victoria will be the first state to attempt a round of local government elections in the COVID-19 recovery. There are 79 councils across Victoria and 648 elected councillors, of whom 240  38 per cent  are women. But Ruth McGowan, gender equality advocate in local government and author of the book Get Elected, reports that there has been a collapse in interest from female candidates. "We're heading for a precipice," she says. "A lot of women are looking at it and they're facing economic insecurity and more demands on their home lives. Not to mention worries about going out and campaigning where you can't go to public meetings, you can't stand outside supermarkets, you've got to be super savvy to run an online campaign. A lot of them are just going: Stuff it." Local government organisations have lobbied the State Government to defer the elections, but have been rebuffed. Thirteen councils presently have just one elected woman. "I reckon we are going to go back to having some with no women at all," is Ms McGowan's prediction. What else will women do less of during this period, as they bunker down to keep their families stable? No doubt, the picture will become clearer over time, like a Polaroid. But what is obvious right now is that COVID-19 is not like a war in one very important respect: it is destroying the employment of women. "World War II was a driver of female empowerment," says Bianca Hartge Hazelman, founder and editor of Financy, which tracks women's financial independence. "Women got a taste of money in their pocket and that really drove a great push towards financial independence and equality. "What we are having now is almost the reverse. I've been tracking the financial progress of women for many years, and this is the slowest start to a year since 2015." The social and economic commentator George Megalogenis has dubbed the COVID-19 contraction a "pink-collar recession", pointing out that unlike the 1990s recession in which men lost 85 per cent of the jobs, and the 1980s recession in which they lost 76 per cent of the jobs, more than half of the direct workforce victims so far in this event are female. COVID-19 and its attendant gang of unintended consequences have a number of bad news items for women. One: They are over-represented in the fields most affected by an economic shutdown. The hardest-hit sector, food and accommodation services, for instance, is a heavy employer of women and has shed a third of its workforce since March, according to the latest information available from the Australian Bureau of Statistics. The next worst hit is the arts, which has lost a quarter of its total jobs  again, more of them from women.  Two: Women are over-represented in casual employment, and thus more likely to both lose their jobs during the COVID-19 contraction and be ineligible for support under the Government's Job Keeper package. Bankwest Curtin Economic Centre researchers Rebecca Cassells and Alan Duncan crunched the numbers of casual workers employed for less than the 12 month benchmark required to receive JobKeeper. They report that in the food and accommodation sector, there are an estimated 92,600 men who are casuals of less than a year's tenure, but 117,600 women. And in the health care and social assistance sector, the disparity is astonishing; 89,100 women, compared to 17,700 men. Sometimes, the data on casual workers is hard to winnow out; in the university sector, for example, which has long been accused of casualising its workforce, job figures tend to be reported in terms of full-time equivalent positions, cloaking the actual number of precariously employed teachers and administrative staff. The National Tertiary Education Union has estimated that women are around 58 per cent of casual employees in Australian universities. This matches the general pattern of women occupying more junior and less well-paid jobs in the sector; while more women than men are employed at universities, for example, the number of men employed at senior lecturer level or above is 9002, compared with 4685 women (on 2018 figures). Universities are not eligible for the JobKeeper program, so significant ongoing job losses are expected in a sector suffering an extreme impact from the loss of international student fees. Opposition education spokeswomen Tanya Plibersek said 66 per cent of non-academic positions at Australian universities were held by women. "Universities are like small towns," she said. "There's hospitality, there's admin, there's the cafeteria and student services  when you look at, for example, 600 job losses at Central Queensland University in Rockhampton, they are not professors. There are a lot of middle-paid and low-paid workers there too." A third significant factor for women is that they are hugely dominant in the (often low-paid) fields which during this crisis have qualified as "essential services". More than 75 per cent of "health professionals"  which includes everyone from pharmacists to social workers to medical scientists, according to the Workplace Gender Equality Agency  are women. This group, like teachers, is more likely to be called upon to keep working through the crisis, often putting their own health at risk, while simultaneously obliged to shoulder the previously discussed increase in domestic work. How to summarise this fusillade of data erupting from this extraordinary period in our nation's history, and the world's? Perhaps like this: Women right now are more likely to lose work that is paid and also more likely to pick up work that is unpaid. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Perhaps unsurprisingly, in view of all this, women are feeling distinctly more anxious and stressed than men right now. The COVID-19 Monitor Australia, a research project conducted by Vox Pops Labs in partnership with the ABC, asked respondents in its more recent survey to describe their own state of mental health. More than a third of women  35 per cent  said they very frequently felt stressed in the past week. This was a significant escalation from reported stress levels before the outbreak, when only 17 per cent of women classified themselves as very frequently stressed. And stress levels among men were lower than women's in both cases  13 per cent pre-COVID, rising to 22 per cent now. According to the survey, women have also experienced a slump in optimism over the course of the pandemic. Pre-COVID, 65 per cent of women said they felt optimistic, but in the most recent survey that fell to 47 per cent. Men's rate of optimism fell too, but less markedly; from a pre-COVID level of 56 per cent down to 52 per cent. Anxious, overworked, insecure; it's not where Australian women hoped we'd be, going into this new decade. "I think it's not going to be a good year for progress," says Bianca Hartge Hazelman. "One thing we really need to do is understand the real extent to which women carry the burden of unpaid work and support the economy. If they weren't doing that, the country would be in a worse place than we are now. Maybe we need that national call out, that recognition, like we did in wartime; this time to support women, who are statistically taking the brunt of this." 
NT parks hibernate in coronavirus lockdown as tourists kept out of Australian landmarks
While floating in the middle of a croc-laden river might not be the scenario one associates with care-free serenity, it's bliss for tour guide Dennis Miller. Sitting on his boat in Kakadu's Yellow Water Billabong at sunrise, Dennis is at peace and wondering: could croc country be the safest place in the world right now? "Come to the Northern Territory, it's the safest place on earth, we've got everything for you, and we're just waiting," says Dennis, talking to the ABC from his boat. But while Kakadu National Park remains closed to the public until at least June 18 under coronavirus restrictions, and tourists remain locked out of the Northern Territory under strict border controls, Dennis says the lack of tourism means guides, and even the crocs, are getting lonely. "The crocodiles are smiling, the ducks are whistling, and they're waiting for the tourists to come," he says. "We'd love to have you here in this beautiful spot when it opens." At this time of year in Kakadu's serene wetlands, Dennis says up to seven cruises a day with groups from all over Australia and across the world would usually depart for the famous Yellow Water Cruise. "It's beautiful at all times of the day, but sunrise is special: with the sun coming up behind the escarpment, hitting the water and the colour," Dennis says. "The sunset, too, when you get the reflections on the trees there and the colour really comes out. "In the Northern Territory, the floodplain, the river system, all those ecosystems connected together [you see] on the cruise. It's the only place in the Territory that has all these environments; all the birds and the crocodiles all in one." But with no tourists to entertain, Dennis, one of the most popular guides on Kakadu's waterways, says he remains hard at work in the park. "There's lots to do getting the boats ready and the hotel ready for the tourists when they get here as well," he says. Stephen Mills, the tours manager at Kakadu Tourism, believes Kakadu will remain well-visited by tourists when border restrictions lift in the Territory. "When you have scenery like this, you can understand why the world wants to come to Kakadu," Stephen says. "[It's] one of the richest cultural areas in Australia. 65,000 years the Indigenous people have lived here continuously. "There are hundreds of crocs, millions of birds, wallabies, the fish life is incredible. It truly is one of the wonders of the world." Tess Atie, who runs cultural tours with NT Indigenous Tours at Litchfield National Park south of Darwin, says she is hard at work planning for tourists when the Territory's borders ultimately reopen. But for now, only Northern Territory residents can visit Litchfield  a place Tess grew up hunting for turtles and fishing for barramundi. "My family have lived here all our lives," she says. "We've been living and hunting through this area, coming here for generations. "I love sharing my Aboriginal cultural connection with our visitors when they come from interstate or around the world  I'm very lucky and fortunate to give them that cultural experience here in Litchfield." For tourism operators like Tess who rely on interstate and overseas travel, the current peak season between Easter and September in the NT will yield very little business. "For my businesses, it's had a great impact, it's been very hard  we're waiting for our borders to open. Once the borders open, we'll be ready," she says. "It's been a deep rollercoaster for our businesses  it's been very hard. But there's also a positive: it gives us time to create." While the Northern Territory Chief Minister has given no indication when the NT's borders could reopen, Tess is hopeful tourists from across the country could return in time for the tropical summer in October. "My favourite thing about the tropical summer in the Northern Territory, especially here in Litchfield, is that the spring-fed waterfalls are bursting and there's just so much water," Tess says. "That's when you get the very best of the wet season up here. "My message for all Australians is to come up to the NT [when it opens], because we do have a unique Aboriginal culture up here, we have beautiful waterfalls and a beautiful tropical summer." 
Mallacoota school to reopen after coronavirus pandemic and bushfires shut it down
There's a blackened spot near the top of the wooden power pole outside the Mallacoota fire station that serves as a constant reminder of the terrible ferocity of the town's black summer. The pole is just metres from the Mallacoota Fire Brigade shed. Five months after the sky turned black and red here, the local brigade captain, Rod Lewis, recalls looking out of his incident control room to see the "massive wall of flame" at their door. "It was pitch black, smoke, embers coming down by the tonne, thousands of embers," he remembers.  "It was coming down like a torrential rainstorm with red embers catching everything on fire." He estimates the fire was towering 30 metres into the sky. "Radiant heat somewhere up around 800 to 1,000 degrees Celsius. It was extremely hot," Mr Lewis said. "The ground was just erupting in flames." He said "fireballs" were flying across the area and one hit the power pole. Then the fire station itself was alight, forcing firefighters to turn their hoses on their own building. "That fire station had to survive for the recovery process and the management of the fire," Mr Lewis said. Mallacoota lost more than 100 homes in the blazes that raged in and around the town. But the fire station was saved. At the time, Rod Lewis's own family were among those inside.  As well as preserving human life, his priority was saving people's homes and protecting the local school, which is a few streets deeper into the community. He said the fire station was the last line of defence. "The centre of the town is behind us, [the] school, petrol stations, central business area. That had to be protected at all costs." He said the school was particularly important to save because getting students back there would be vital in the recovery. The fire ended up jumping the road and getting into the back of the school, but the damage was limited. The school has become an important focal point for the renewal of Mallacoota. Principal Tim Cashmore, known in the classroom as Mr C, is responsible for students ranging from five to 18 years old. He said many families with children at the school were affected by the fires and five lost everything. Three members of staff also lost their houses. "It's a long, grieving recovery process," he said.  "The volunteer firefighters literally saved our town. "One of our students was one of the firefighters, he's a very brave boy, doing his year 12." He said many other students put themselves forward to help others in a multitude of ways. Just when the children returned to school after the fires, hungry for companionship, the coronavirus pandemic sent most back into self-isolation. Mr Cashmore and his staff are now preparing for students to return on Tuesday, with a new world of coronavirus restrictions to navigate.  He anticipates the fires will hold some children back.  "There is evidence that kids will regress," he said.  "But we have also found that kids catch up really quickly when they are ready." One of the ceremonial duties that will be performed will be the handover of special mementos made by the junior students individually for each volunteer emergency worker who helped fight the Mallacoota fires. The lovingly crafted figurines made in each worker's image are lined up ready to be presented when school comes back. One has even been made for fire captain Rod Lewis, complete with a dusting of black ash.  "There won't be a dry eye in the house when they get handed over," Mr Cashmore said. 
Boris Johnson's top adviser Dominic Cummings travelled 400km during coronavirus lockdown
The British Government is facing accusations of hypocrisy after it was revealed that Prime Minister Boris Johnson's top adviser, Dominic Cummings, travelled more than 400km to his parents' house during a nationwide lockdown. Local media reported that Mr Cummings, who lives in London, was seen at his parents' property in north-east England at the end of March.  The UK's lockdown, which began March 23, stipulated that people should remain at their primary residence, leaving only for essential local errands and exercise, and not visit relatives. Anyone with symptoms was told to completely isolate themselves. Local police said that officers went to a house on March 31 and, "explained to the family the guidelines around self-isolation and reiterated the appropriate advice around essential travel."  The previous day, Downing Street had announced that Mr Cummings was self-isolating with symptoms of COVID-19. Mr Johnson's office said in a statement that Mr Cummings made the trip because his wife was showing coronavirus symptoms, he thought he was likely to also get sick, and relatives had offered to help look after the couple's young son. It said Mr Cummings stayed in a house "near to but separate from" his extended family. "Owing to his wife being infected with suspected coronavirus and the high likelihood that he would himself become unwell, it was essential for Dominic Cummings to ensure his young child could be properly cared for," a Downing Street spokesman said. "At no stage was he or his family spoken to by the police about this matter, as is being reported. His actions were in line with coronavirus guidelines. Mr Cummings believes he behaved reasonably and legally."  The local police force has since spoken and says it stands by its statement. The opposition Labour Party has called for an urgent inquiry into the matter. "The British people have made important and painful sacrifices to support the national effort, including being away from family in times of need," Rachel Reeves, Labour's cabinet office minister in waiting, wrote in a letter to the country's most senior civil servant Mark Sedwill. "It is therefore vital that the government can reassure the public that its most senior figures have been adhering to the same rules as everyone else." Speaking to reporters outside his home, Mr Cummings says he did "the right thing" in making the trip. He said to reporters: "Who cares about good looks. It's a question of doing the right thing. It's not about what you guys think." Transport Secretary Grant Shapps said Mr Cummings had the backing of Mr Johnson. "I can tell you that the PM provides Mr Cummings with his full support," he said. One of Mr Johnson's most senior ministers, Michael Gove, said of the situation: "Caring for your wife and child is not a crime." Mr Cummings was one of the architects of the Brexit campaign, and was later appointed Johnson's top aide. He is one of several senior UK officials who have been accused of flouting the lockdown rules that they advocated for the rest of the country. Epidemiologist Neil Ferguson stepped down as government scientific adviser earlier this month after a newspaper disclosed that his girlfriend had crossed London to stay with him during the lockdown. In April, Catherine Calderwood resigned as Scotland's chief medical officer after twice travelling from Edinburgh to her second home. When Mr Cummings was asked if he would consider his position, he told reporters: "Obviously not." ABC/ Wires 
Coronavirus breach sees NT Police issue warning to venue as owners say rules aren't working
A Darwin pub has been issued a warning by Northern Territory Police for failing to comply with coronavirus regulations on Friday night, while another voluntarily shut its doors after being "overwhelmed" by patrons. The incidents come as one Darwin venue says in-venue coronavirus safety measures are, at times, not working or proving difficult to manage. "The restrictions, I don't know how well thought out they were. We do our best to follow them and we encourage our patrons to follow them," said Matt Mulga, owner of Lola's Pergola in Cullen Bay. "A two-hour restriction, you're encouraging a pub crawl; you're encouraging patrons to go from this bar to that bar to that bar." Mr Mulga said he'd witnessed people leave his venue, go to a nearby restaurant and then come back in half an hour.  "I'm sure we'll look back at [restrictions easing rules] and say they were ill-conceived  and I'm sure the Government will admit that," Mr Mulga said. "If we don't have places like this open, instead we have [house] places where there's no control." Northern Territory pubs, bars and restaurants are open to the public under the proviso customers stay for a maximum of two hours and adhere to physical distancing, a 10-patron table limit is enforced, and that meals are served with alcohol. Morris D'Arrigo, the operations manager at Six Tanks Brew Co in the Darwin CBD, said constantly advising  people to follow the rules when they were drinking was a challenge. "It's a bit of education, coaching, training to let people know this is for their safety," Mr D'Arrigo said. "If it saves my grandmother and my kids, so be it. Let's follow it and I'm sure businesses look at it that way." NT Police Acting Commander Shaun Gill said the warning issued to the Darwin premises on Friday night was "in relation to service of alcohol without meals". Police said the other venue, which closed its doors, was not at fault and did "a very good job" after "a large crowd on very short notice" attended the premises. "The one that was really busy actually had a plan in place  [but] they were unable to deal with the public due to the number of people that arrived", Acting Commander Gill said. "To their credit, they actually closed their doors and no longer served because they couldn't abide by the COVID-19 restrictions." Police said rather than issue the venue with a warning, officers "offered some education" on how it could comply with operating regulations. Despite the two separate instances, Acting Commander Gill said "the public were fairly good and the numbers were fairly low" across the evening in Darwin. "This is just a timely reminder for all involved that the onus is on individuals as well as licensed premises that they have to adhere to restrictions," he said. Police did not disclose the name of either of the venues but said they may be named if problems persisted. No venues have received a fine for breaching coronavirus safety regulations since stage two restriction easing commenced in the Northern Territory on May 15. The fine for breach of coronavirus safety regulations for NT venues is $5,000. Acting Commander Gill said NT Police would continue to take a conciliatory approach with businesses and venues in the early phases of restriction easing before dishing out fines. "We want to give some education to start with and then we want to give [venues] some warning," he said. "To give them an opportunity to comply and then after that, if they continue to fail, then infringement notices will be issued." Police said it was imperative venues and patrons stuck to the 10-person-per-table limit and that 1.5-metre physical distancing was non-negotiable. "People need to be reminded that we're still coming out of a serious event. We're only in the [early] stages of going out of some severe restrictions," Acting Commander Gill said. "The ramifications are that we could end up where we were before." 
Coronavirus update: Tory MPs join calls for Dominic Cummings to resign, New York Times lists 1,000 Americans killed in COVID-19 pandemic
The British Prime Minister's chief adviser, Dominic Cummings, is refusing to quit over reports he broke coronavirus lockdown rules, despite several Conservative MPs adding to calls for his resignation.  Meanwhile, with the US death toll approaching 100,000, The New York Times has printed "just 1 per cent of the toll" on its front page. It came as people across the country got out of their houses for the unofficial start of summer. This story was regularly updated throughout Sunday. This story is no longer being updated. For the latest coronavirus news and updates, follow this story. Boris Johnson's chief adviser is refusing to quit over reports he broke coronavirus lockdown rules, despite several Conservative MPs now joining calls for his resignation. Dominic Cummings, who masterminded the 2016 Brexit campaign, travelled over 400 kilometres to his parents' house during a nationwide lockdown. His wife was showing COVID-19 symptoms at the time. The Prime Minister's office said Mr Cummings visited his parents to ensure his young son could be properly cared for, but the Opposition Labour Party said he flouted the Government's own advice. Mr Cummings told reporters he had no intention of stepping aside when asked if he was going to "consider [his] position". "Obviously not. Don't think so. You guys are probably about as right about that as you were about Brexit," he said. Conservative MPs Steve Baker, Simon Hoare and Damian Collins called for Mr Cummings' resignation on Sunday.  "It is intolerable that Boris' Government is losing so much political capital," Mr Baker wrote on Twitter.  "Dominic Cummings must go." Fellow Conservative MP Damian Collins said Mr Cummings "has a track record of believing that the rules don't apply to him and treating the scrutiny that should come to anyone in a position of authority with contempt". "The Government would be better without him," he said. On Sunday, Transport Minister Grant Shapps, speaking on BBC, said he would not resign. With the US coronavirus death toll expected to surpass 100,000 in the coming days, The New York Times dedicated its front page to 1,000 of those killed by the virus. Page one of its Sunday edition listed the names, ages and brief details of some of the virus victims with the headline, "US deaths near 100,000, an incalculable loss". "They were not simply names on a list. They were us," the front page read. "Numbers alone cannot possibly measure the impact of the coronavirus on America, whether it is the number of patients treated, jobs interrupted or lives cut short. "The 1,000 people here reflect just 1 per cent of the toll. None were mere numbers." The paper said it drew from 1,000 obituaries and death notices in hundreds of US newspapers to highlight the pandemic's individual human toll. The Victorian Government has announced a further easing of coronavirus restrictions, including the reopening of outdoor playgrounds and skate parks, from this Tuesday. On June 1, overnight stays at private residences and tourist accommodation will be allowed, and people will be allowed to have gatherings of 20 people in their homes. Public libraries, entertainment and cultural venues and zoos will also be reopened with numbers limited. The state recorded one further COVID-19 case on Saturday, while another case was reclassified as positive, bringing the total tally to 1,603. Authorities in NSW, where there has been just one new case of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, has announced beauty and tanning salons and nail bars will be allowed to reopen from June 1. Gyms will remain closed for now, however. NSW Health Minister Brad Hazzard said his office received frequent requests for salons to reopen over the past three months. "It hascertainly been a very earnest effortfrom a lot of people to make sure wecould open [the salons]," he said. Mr Hazzard advised those beauty business would need to have "a COVID-safe plan" before they reopened, and adhere to 1.5-metre social distancing. He said he was keen to get gyms open as soon as possible, but NSW Health was working with the gym industry on the safety elements involved in reopening. Millions of Muslims around the world are celebrating Eid-al-Fitr, which marks the end of the holy fasting month of Ramadan.  While Muslims are used to celebrating the holiday with large gatherings and congregational prayers, this year the annual holiday has been practised differently amid coronavirus restrictions. In the Middle East, Muslim faithful prayed outside closed gates leading to the Al Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem's Old City as the holy site remained closed amid coronavirus restrictions. In Malaysia, where more than 7,000 people are infected with coronavirus and 115 have died, many Muslim hospital workers spent the day at work. Muslims continued to congregate for Eid prayers on the streets in Indonesia despite government advice to worship at home. However, most worshippers followed the coronavirus guidelines by wearing masks and distancing themselves from each other during prayer. In Pakistan, Muslims held Eid prayers while maintaining social-distancing rules, in accordance with government rules.  More than 1,000 people joined public prayers at an open field in Karachi. Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi says any lawsuits brought against China over the COVID-19 have "zero factual basis in law or international precedence."  Mr Wang told reporters at a news conference on Sunday that China was a victim of the global pandemic alongside other countries and had reached out to assist other governments in need.  "To our regret, in addition to the raging of the new coronavirus, a political virus is also spreading in the US which is to take every chance to attack and discredit China," Mr Wang said. "Some US politicians, heedless of basic facts, have fabricated too many lies and plotted too many conspiracies." Raising such lawsuits "tramples on the international rule of law and abandons the human conscience. It's untrue, unjustifiable and illegal," Mr Wang said.  Those who would bring such litigation against China are "living in a daydream and will humiliate themselves". Many Americans have had their first big break from coronavirus shutdowns for Memorial Day weekend, flocking to beaches and outdoor areas for the unofficial start of the US summer. In Florida, surfside restaurant The Back Porch was packed despite operating at 50 per cent seating capacity to ensure chairs and umbrellas could be appropriately distanced. Newcomers had to wait for places to become free before they could enter. In Arizona, holiday travellers looking for access to some of the desert's canyons and other natural features caused a 24-kilometre traffic jam on the highway, according to the Arizona Department of Transportation. Some recreation areas, including the popular reservoir at Saguaro Lake, became so crowded that authorities had to shut them down. While the Memorial Day holiday that honours fallen members of the US military is on Monday, the weekend leading up to it marks the unofficial start of summer, with Americans traditionally flocking to beaches, gathering at backyard barbecues and unfurling picnic blankets in parks. Arlington National Cemetery, which holds veterans of US conflicts, remained open only to family pass holders who must have a face covering to enter. Access was granted to visit gravesites only, with no touring allowed. In rain-soaked New York, the epicentre of the US coronavirus crisis, Governor Andrew Cuomo discussed his decision to allow up to 10 people to attend ceremonies honouring military veterans, warning that social distancing and face masks should be part of any plans to get together. State beaches in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut were reopened, but rain kept most people away. Elsewhere, Mount Rushmore National Memorial in South Dakota welcomed visitors again on Saturday, earlier than expected. The Northern Territory Government has confirmed restrictions on travel within the NT will be lifted in less than a fortnight. Chief Minister Michael Gunner said the biosecurity zones  limiting travel to remote communities  will be removed almost two weeks ahead of schedule. It comes after land councils called for the travel restrictions to be lifted at the same time as other coronavirus restrictions are eased on June 5. The Government said the interstate travel restrictions would remain in place indefinitely. Prime Minister Scott Morrison has taken responsibility for a $60 billion JobKeeper miscalculation but dubbed an effort to demand answers from the Treasurer a political stunt. A Labor-led coronavirus parliamentary committee will seek to compel Treasurer Josh Frydenberg to explain how the Federal Government overestimated the JobKeeper wage subsidy program by $60 billion. "But what it means is Australians won't have to borrow as much money," Mr Morrison said.  Opposition Senate Leader Penny Wong said a COVID-19 committee examining Government measures in response to the coronavirus wanted to quiz the Treasurerabout the mistake. "The chair of the Senate Committee, Senator [Katy] Gallagher ... will call Josh Frydenberg to give evidence," she said. "What I would say to Josh: 'This is your opportunity to front up and explain $60 billion blunder to the Parliament and to the Australian people'." Meanwhile, the Government's COVIDSafe app has hit six million downloads, still below the 40 per cent rate cited by the Government as the minimum needed for the app to be effective. Clive Palmer says he will lodge documents with the High Court this week, arguing Western Australia's border closure is unconstitutional. The mining magnate wanted to visit WA for meetings with businesspeople, senator Mathias Cormann and potential 2021 state election candidates for his United Australia Party, but was rejected due to coronavirus restrictions. "Closing down the border is not only an act of stupidity by WA Premier Mark McGowan, but it is against the Australian constitution and I am confident the High Court will see it that way as well," Mr Palmer said in a statement on Sunday. Mr Palmer said he would lodge the legal documents on Monday and hoped to have a directions hearing in the High Court by the end of the week. Mr McGowan said on Friday he endorsed the WA Police Commissioner's decision not to grant Mr Palmer an exemption from the travel ban. The city of Wuhan, the original epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak in China, conducted 1,470,950 nucleic acid tests for the virus on Friday, the local health authority said. Some 1,000,729 tests had been completed the previous day. By comparison, as of Friday, Australia had conducted more than 1,192,262 tests since the outbreak began. Wuhan kicked off a campaign on May 14 to look for asymptomatic carriers  infected people who show no outward sign of illness  after confirming on May 9-10 its first cluster of COVID-19 infections since its lockdown was lifted on April 8. Authorities have said they aim to test all 11 million of the city's residents, an exercise likely to cost more than 1 billion yuan ($220 million). China on Saturday reported no new confirmed cases for the first time since it began announcing infections in January. Brazil has prohibited most foreigners from entering the country for another 30 days. The country is home to the second-highest number of confirmed coronavirus infections in the world after the United States. Commercial traffic is not affected by the measure and Brazilians and local residents will be allowed to enter. The decision was published in the official Gazette on Friday night, citing "health reasons". Brazil has reported more than 330,000 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and more than 21,000 deaths. Experts consider those numbers under counts because of the lack of widespread testing. US President Donald Trump went on his first golf outing since the coronavirus pandemic broke out, visiting his club in the Washington suburbs in a purposeful display of normalcy. Mr Trump's motorcade took him from the White House to Trump National Golf Club, and he was spotted wearing a white cap and white polo shirt. It was his first time at a golf property since March 8, when he visited his club in West Palm Beach, Florida. That was the same weekend when he met at his Mar-a-Lago retreat with Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro, whose press secretary later tested positive for the virus. Some White House staffers who had been in contact with the press aide went into quarantine afterward but none tested positive. Mr Trump is eager to promote the idea that the United States is returning to normal, although the death toll from the coronavirus outbreak continues to rise. Mr Trump's coronavirus task force coordinator, Deborah Birx, told a White House briefing on Friday that Americans over this Memorial Day weekend should "be outside, play golf, play tennis with marked balls, go to the beach  but stay six feet apart". The Department of Agriculture in Guam has invited hunters to participate in a pig-hunting derby to provide food for families in need during the coronavirus pandemic.  The two-day derby is scheduled to begin next Saturday, the Pacific Daily News reported.  The department released a statement saying the derby was intended to feed families, foster familial hunter development and reduce the feral pig population.  Event organisers are working with mayors to distribute pigs whole and unprocessed to residents within their villages and provide safe handling guidelines. A 107-year-old Iranian woman who was infected with coronavirus has recovered, Iran's semi-official Fars news agency has reported. The woman, Saltanat Akbari, was admitted to the Khansari hospital in the central city of Arak.  She was released from the hospital after spending "some time" in isolation. "She defeated the virus with the help of doctors and nurses at the hospital," the report said. Iran is one of the most affected countries in the Middle East, with 133,521 cases and 7,359 deaths.  Russia on Sunday reported 153 coronavirus deaths over the past 24 hours, the epidemic's highest daily toll, raising total fatalities to 3,541, the country's coronavirus crisis response centre said. It also said 8,599 new cases had been documented, fewer than on the previous day, pushing the nationwide tally of infections to 344,481. More than 40 people have tested positive for COVID-19 after attending a religious service in Germany. The service was held at a church in Frankfurt on May 10, after lockdown restrictions were eased. Church officials said they adhered to social-distancing rules, and had disinfected the building ahead of the service. Germany has recorded low numbers of coronavirus compared to much of Western Europe, allowing the country to ease restrictions over the past two weeks. Several thousand followers of Spain's far-right Vox party have gathered in Madrid and other cities to protest the Government's handling of the coronavirus outbreak. Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez announced that the country would reopen for international tourism from July, as the country emerges from one of Europe's strictest lockdowns. Its football league will be allowed to resume from June 8. Vox called for protesters to come in their cars and motorbikes to skirt the current prohibition on social gatherings in effect under a two-month long state of emergency. "Let your desire be heard for the resignation of the Government," Vox leader Santiago Abascal said from the open-top bus leading the cars inching down a Madrid boulevard. Vox called the protest the 'Caravan for Spain and Liberty'. Most cars were decked with Spanish flags and there were also small groups of people who participated on foot, with some not respecting the two-metre social distancing rules.  More protests were held in Barcelona, Sevilla and other provincial capitals. Over 28,000 Spaniards have been confirmed to have died from COVID-19. The lockdown successfully reduced the daily contagion rate of over 20 per cent at the height of the crisis to under 1 per cent for the past week. Hundreds of deaths from "coronavirus-like symptoms" have raised fears COVID-19 is rapidly spreading undetected throughout war-torn Yemen, where the United Nations and medical workers say the health care system "has in effect collapsed". According to official numbers, Yemen has confirmed 212 infections and 39 deaths, but with one of lowest rates of testing in the world, aid workers fear this figure is "just the tip of the iceberg". Medicins Sans Frontieres reported on Friday as many as 80 people were dying at home per day  up from a pre-outbreak norm of 10  in the city of Aden, where the international aid group run the only dedicated COVID-19 centre in southern Yemen. This week Jens Laerke, spokesman for the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, told a Geneva briefing that afterfive years of war and now a pandemic, "Yemen is really on the brink" and its health system "has in effect collapsed". Medical workers in southern Yemen told the ABC that some staff had been detained or threatened by authorities for sharing information about the outbreak on social media. Sources inside Yemen say there are no lockdown measures, curfews or social distancing in place. A new cluster of coronavirus infections has broken out in Malaysia at a detention centre for undocumented migrants, authorities have confirmed. Malaysia has this month arrested more than 2,000 foreigners for not having permits that allow them to be in the country following raids in areas under lockdown. The centres they are detained in are often crowded, with dozens of migrants packed in a single cell. The United Nations and rights groups have called on Malaysia to stop the crackdown and criticised authorities for going after a vulnerable community during the pandemic. The South-East Asian country has so far reported 7,185 virus infections and 115 deaths. The health ministry said on Saturday that 21 cases were identified at the Semenyih detention centre near the capital Kuala Lumpur, which houses around 1,600 detainees. It is the second detention centre at which a cluster of virus infections has broken out. Around 60 cases were reported among the 1,400 detainees at the Bukit Jalil centre earlier this week. In recent weeks, there has been public anger towards refugees and other foreigners, who have been accused of spreading disease, burdening the state and taking jobs as the economy plummets.  Rohingya refugees in particular have been targets of harassment and threats. Thailand has begun testing a vaccine against the coronavirus on monkeys after positive trials in mice, an official says. Thailand's Minister of Higher Education, Science, Research and Innovation, Suvit Maesincee, said researchers had moved testing of the vaccine to monkeys and hoped to have a "clearer outcome" of its effectiveness by September. "This project is for the human race, not just Thais," Dr Suvit told reporters on Saturday. The Prime Minister has outlined a policy that we must develop a vaccine and join the world community workforce on this." Thailand announced on Wednesday it was developing a vaccine  one of at least 100 potential vaccines in the works worldwide  and hoped to have it into production by next year. The vaccine candidate being tested by Bangkok's Chualongkorn University and two public sector partners harnesses messenger RNA technology, which unlike older types of vaccine does not contain any of the virus it seeks to attack. It instead uses part of the virus's genetic code to ultimately produce antibodies inside the human body. Thailand has several active COVID-19 vaccine-development projects, including separate cooperative efforts with China and the United States. ABC/Reuters/AP/AAP 
China reports no new daily coronavirus cases for first time since pandemic began
China has recorded no new confirmed COVID-19 cases on the mainland for the first time since the pandemic began in the central city of Wuhan late last year.  However, it had continued to see an influx of imported cases, mainly involving Chinese nationals returning from abroad The National Health Commission (NHC) said in a statement on Saturday (local time) there had been no daily rise in the number of cases compared to four new cases on the previous day.  It said, however, there were two new suspected cases: an imported one in Shanghai and locally transmitted case in the north-eastern province of Jilin. New asymptomatic cases of the coronavirus fell to 28 from 35 a day earlier, the NHC said. China had seen a sharp fall in locally transmitted cases since March as major restrictions on people movement helped it to take control of the epidemic in many parts of the country. However, it had continued to see an influx of imported cases, mainly involving Chinese nationals returning from abroad, while new clusters of infections in the north-eastern border provinces of Jilin and Heilongjiang have emerged in recent weeks. Wuhan also reported this month its first cluster of infections since a lockdown on the city ended on April 8, prompting authorities to warn that counter-epidemic measures could not be relaxed and to launch a campaign to test all of Wuhan's 11 million residents for COVID-19. There are still some restrictions in place for locals, as people with the virus are still being monitored and treated. China's Government had begun using hyper-vigilant measures to track and trap remaining cases. The first case of the virus was identified in China's Hubei province and believed to have originated from The Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market in Wuhan. While Wuhan China had been the epicentre of the outbreak for many months, South America has become a new epicentre of the COVID-19 pandemic with Brazil hardest-hit.  Cases are rising in some African countries that so far have a relatively low death toll, the World Health Organization (WHO) said. "The COVID-19 pandemic today reached a milestone in Africa, with more than 100,000 confirmed cases. The virus has now spread to every country in the continent since the first case was confirmed in the region 14 weeks ago," the WHO said in a statement, noting there were 3,100 confirmed deaths on the vast continent. Wuhan has a population of more than 11 million people, which is greater than New York City, where more than 10,000 people have died because of COVID-19. Many suspect China's official figures remain conservative, speculating there were more victims in the early weeks of the outbreak who died without being tested. On Saturday afternoon, the number of confirmed cases in the mainland stood at 82,971 and the death toll remained unchanged at 4,634.  Reuters/AP 
Error in JobKeeper coronavirus payment will provide both relief and grief for the Federal Treasurer
With Josh Frydenberg staring down the barrel of the biggest budget deficits in Australian history, getting a call on Thursday night from the Treasury Secretary saying he's found $60 billion down the back of the couch gives the man holding the nation's tattered chequebook a modicum of relief. It's a massive amount of coin and will give the books a considerable boost as the Government plots a course out of the coronavirus economic slump. But the bureaucratic bungle which revealed Treasury had over-forecast the impact of the Coalition's JobKeeper wage subsidy program also opens the Federal Government to demands it needs to be more generous. The original bill was to be $130 billion, and more than 6 million workers would be supported. It's now clear only $70 billion will be spent and 3.5 million employees given a financial leg up. On a more basic level, the Government's critics will use this episode as an example of general administrative incompetence, wondering how the alarm bells weren't ringing in Treasury and the ATO when businesses registering for JobKeeper were making mistakes in the form. That, and why no-one stopped to think the numbers should perhaps have been lower given Australia was not hit as hard by the virus as the Government had anticipated when it did its original calculations, will also need to be addressed. It's not like they simply forgot to carry the one. The ATO and Treasury believe it was 1,000 businesses that caused the error but no doubt the boffins behind the scenes are scrambling to check, and double-check, their maths to make sure their future forecasts are watertight. The departments have put the error down to the fact that they were busy shovelling millions to the people that actually were eligible, but whether that reasoning stacks up will no doubt be debated at length in the weeks and months to come. Putting aside (just for a moment) the administrative muck-up, the Federal Government will be hit with a refreshed campaign to expand which workers benefit from the support scheme. That issue has been bubbling away ever since JobKeeper was announced at the end of March, as the nation's businesses grappled with new coronavirus lockdown rules sending them to the wall. Casual workers, staff in the university sector and the nation's creatives left floundering by the shutdown of the arts industry are among those on the list of potential beneficiaries if the scheme was adjusted. Labor has been lobbying for those tweaks, even though the party backed JobKeeper through Parliament at the height of the crisis  Anthony Albanese not wanting to let "the perfect be the enemy of the good" at a time when the country was being hit by the twin health and fiscal threats posed by COVID-19. Given the Government had already planned on spending $60 billion more than is now needed, the argument will be that there's no point writing that spending off as a happy symptom of an economy not struggling as much as had been feared. In other words, Josh Frydenberg should just press on and spend, spend, spend. His Assistant Treasurer, Michael Sukkar, was the Government's frontman on Saturday when those questions were being thrown around and downplayed any suggestion JobKeeper could be opened up to more Australians. "The money, as I said, is borrowed money," he told Channel Seven. "It's not a pot of money, sitting there just waiting to be spent and waiting for the Government to decide how to spend it.  "The parameters of the scheme are broad." Mr Sukkar was grilled about eligibility for the scheme by the ABC's Raf Epstein on May 14, just a week ago. "You and I would perhaps be having a different conversation today if you said to me 'Michael, there are only 3 million employees who are covered, it's half what we expected?' In that case, I would be saying to you, 'yeah, look, there's more of a likelihood of wholesale changes'" A review of the program is due next month and the Government appears keen to manage community expectations ahead of that  using whatever the findings are to justify any changes into the future, rather than jumping at its newly found, slightly less debt-laden status.   
ACCC to investigate houseboat company 'refusing refunds' over coronavirus cancellations
The consumer watchdog is investigating a luxury houseboat company in northern Victoria after it refused to refund holidaymakers thousands of dollars for bookings lost to the COVID-19 outbreak. One would-be holidaymaker says he has been left $30,000 out of pocket Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) chair Rod Simms told ABC Statewide Drive about 20 people had complained they couldn't get their money back from Echuca Luxury Houseboats, even though the company had not provided the service because of coronavirus restrictions. Mr Simms described the company's behaviour as "appalling".  "The company should be treating its customers a lot more fairly than that," Mr Simms said. Insurance Broker Don McLardy said he paid almost $30,000 to use a houseboat over Easter but was unable to take the holiday because of travel restrictions. He said he was unable to get a response from Echuca Luxury Houseboats about his money. "We are quite happy to have a replacement trip next Easter or the Easter after that but we've had a lack of response and have pretty much been shut down from Echuca Houseboats," Mr McLardy said.  Gisborne local Suzette Hare said she spent $4,000 on a booking with the company but was told she was not entitled to a refund because she didn't have travel insurance.  "So there was no offer of a rebooking, which was what I was after," Ms Hare said. "No credit, no refund, no nothing." Queenslander Phil Beresford, said he was out of pocket $1,500 and was also told he needed travel insurance. He said he lodged a complaint with VCAT after the company refused to negotiate other options, like a voucher. "It's not their fault that this happened, and it's not our fault," Mr Beresford said. "But to say that we've got to take the full burden of it and that they were going to be fine, it just seems ludicrous and very unconscionable." Mr Simms said it was misleading to tell people they needed travel insurance to get a refund. "Most travel insurance won't cover this anyway. The bigger issue is what are the rights that these customers have," Mr Simms said. He said in most instances consumers did have a right to a refund. "The only times when you won't be entitled to that refund is when there are terms and conditions which specify another remedy, when the situation is outside the control of the company," he said. "(Then) they are entitled to a voucher that is actually usable." Mr Simms said the ACCC's priority in the investigation would be to get a fair deal for consumers. "We've dealt with literally dozens of companies, and we've got a lot of companies to change their policies and treat their customers fairly, so I'd like to think we've had a lot of success," Mr Simms said. He said there would be serious consequences if the company was found to have misled customers. "We can take them to court and the penalties can be up to $10 million," Mr Simms said. Ms Hare told ABC Statewide Drive that, since unhappy customers went public, the company had offered her a full voucher. "I am yet to make a decision about that," Ms Hare said. "This has been a very difficult situation that we have been in and it has not left me feeling very positive about a future booking with this business." Echuca Luxury Houseboats' owner Andrews McKenzie said the company was working in "good faith" to provide the best outcomes for customers. "We are in the process of drafting correspondence to our impacted customers, which will outline our offer of a voucher that they will be able to use over the next three years," Mr McKenzie said. 
A modern rebirth of the international food hall pushes Asian cuisine to new heights in Australia
Much like the neighbourhood milk bar, the international food hall was once a staple of suburban Australian life. After fading out of Australian life over the past two decades, the humble food court is now making a quiet comeback, offering authentic, cheap and culturally diverse dining experiences in a modern era of well-travelled taste buds and colourful Instagram foodie blogs. "I think people are going back to the food court now because the quality is getting better," Malaysian Chinese chef Vincent Lim said. "It's still cheap but it's good quality now. You hang around with your friends, you can have some beer." The food court boom began in Australia in the 1970s, with one of the first being the stand-alone Sun Markets in Perth's CBD. "You'd see the bain-maries sitting there with this slick layer of oil across the top," Suresh Rajan, head of WA's Ethnic Communities Council, recalled. "You'd go to the Chinese place for example, you'd have some curry there, you'd have sweet and sour, Mongolian lamb, fried rice and some noodles and you got a combination. "It was the most horrific things you could ever eat because you literally had everything piled on to one plate. But it was cheap. "It was a real novelty  everyone went to Sun Market because it was a place you could get a meal that gave you exposure to a different variety of cuisine." That messy buffet style was replicated across many suburban food courts, long before the concept was adopted by commercial shopping centres to include the standard array of fast-food restaurants. "We always described it as Anglicised Chinese food," Mr Rajan said. "It wasn't your traditional Chinese food, it was really designed for the Western palate. "It wasn't for the traditional Singaporean market, for example, because they'd make most of these dishes at home." Mr Rajan said as the travelling public's tastes become more refined, the overseas cuisines on offer in Australia became more sophisticated. "It just seemed that the run-of-the-mill restaurants were providing what had previously been only available at the fine dining restaurants," he said. "We Aussies really don't pay for service or the flashy accompaniments that go with a meal, we want a good tasting meal and a good price." Food blogger Mary Noonan said she believed the rise of food trucks and the explosion of "foodie" culture on social media had encouraged people to be more adventurous. "In the past, people used to only like to go out to places that served spaghetti bolognaise, or steak and mash, or fish and chips," she said. "People were only having food that they were comfortable with, or food they were having at home already. "I'm finding over time people are becoming more willing to explore." Ms Noonan said support for food courts was on the rise after years of public disdain. "We're finding that a lot of places are now doing tapas, shared plates and food courts cater for that," she said. "You can go there with everyone and everyone will find something that they're happy with. "I think there's no excuse anymore to not have good quality food, especially in WA where we've got fresh produce everywhere." Mr Rajan said families and students were behind the resurgence. "You're seeing more and more relationships between the various cultural groups," he said. "Particularly in families where you have intercultural marriages where someone has the traditional Anglo cuisines verses something that originated in India. "You've got a family of five or six people, each with different tastes. "I can go to the Malaysian place and have the fish head curry. The fish head curry would be something that no one else makes, but I'll have that there.  "I have it almost every time  but no one else in my family would eat that." Nestled deep in suburban Perth is Spencer Village Food Court, which is recognised as one of the city's the most authentic examples of a Singaporean or Malaysian hawkers market. Tiny kitchens serving traditional meals from South-East Asia and beyond are grouped around a no-frills dining hall that often reaches its capacity. It opened 30 years ago, initially to serve a high concentration of Chinese immigrants and international students in nearby suburbs, but has since built a reputation that reaches far beyond the local area. "Food courts like Spencer Village represent a familiar cultural experience to our multicultural society," said the centre's manager, Cameron Hopkins. "The food is authentic to their origin, as is the dining experience." Danny Hung has run his tiny Malaysian kitchen at Spencer Village for almost 20 years. He said families were brought together around cooking familiar to their roots. "All the Malaysian, Chinese, Indonesian, Singaporean, Thai  everyone  they come here, they have a lot of choice and they're looking for their own flavour, their own food," he said. "Lots of Asian families love to come here  one order there, one order there, the whole family will sit down with each other and enjoy a meal." Joppy Sai recently opened his Thai outlet at Spencer Village after operating a stall at a nearby market for 10 years. "If you think about Asian food hall, this is the first one they'd have to think of. It would have to be," he said. "When it's busy, there's no seats available, we can only do takeaway. "It's multicultural people, Australian, New Zealand, African or any Asian. People across the world come. "We all help each other out when somebody has an issue  maybe there's a leaking tap or something  everyone just comes and helps." Mr Lim said the Australian food courts that succeeded were the ones that created a buzzing atmosphere. "In [the hawkers food courts] in Malaysia and Singapore, you actually see the chef cooking your food right in front of you," he said. "You can talk to the chef, tell him more chilli or less. You're running around with your friends, there's hundreds and hundreds of people. It's a vibe. "You really taste something homemade, something like your grandma's cooking." Mr Lim said Spencer Village replicated that experience on a smaller scale. "Even though they're still cooking behind walls, you see [the chefs] walking around, talking, yelling, shouting to each other," he said. "There's definitely a real vibe there for a food court." But even the well established cultural dining hubs are not immune from the perceived threat of coronavirus. Like many Asian food restaurants across the nation, vendors at Spencer Village have reported seeing a drop-off in trade as fears about the outbreak spread. Mr Hopkins said the impact had been minimal at this stage. "Naturally there is some cause for concern, as this seems bigger than SARS, however at this stage customers have been consistent and resilient," he said. "Support for the food court has been widespread, not just limited to people from certain cultural backgrounds. "We hope it stays that way for everyone's sake." Mr Lim said he expected food courts to become even more diverse to reflect the melting pot of culture in modern Australia. "I believe in the next five years you will see a lot more different cuisines from China that weren't here start opening up and taking off," he said. "The last three or four years you've seen lots of Sichuan restaurants opening up, the hot pots. "You will see a lot more cuisines from the north." He said Asian cuisine would continue to grow as more imported ingredients were made available to the Australian market. "Even places run by Western chefs, they'll use a lot of Asian ingredients to make it like a fusion," he said. "It's not just fish and chips anymore. "Even the fish and chips they will put the miso batter or the miso mayo!" 
The Goop effect: why online pseudoscience is so seductive 
I'm a sceptical person most days, but I do have my weak moments. Last weekend, Gwyneth Paltrow found me in one of them. This article contains content that is not yet available here. Half way through an episode of the lifestyle guru's Netflix series which explored the Wim Hof breathing method, I was almost on board to have cold showers for the rest of my life.  Wim Hof is not the first person to extol the health benefits of freezing water  friends have told me the same, and if you believe the stereotype, Swedish people thrive off running from saunas to ice lakes. So perhaps my mind was primed to fall for this exact episode of Goop.  There are many reasons why we find pseudoscience persuasive, according to Dr Micah Goldwater, a cognitive scientist at the University of Sydney.  It is often simpler for us to add knowledge than subtract it, he said.  "It's actually much easier to add things to your mental model of how things work than to take things away."  There's also the 'illusory truth effect', where the more familiar something sounds, the more likely you are to believe it's true. In other words, because I've heard so many anecdotes about the power of cold water, when I hear an embellishment dressed up in scientific jargon, I may be more likely to endorse it.  As a journalist who reports on online misinformation, I've spent plenty of time in anti-vaccination Facebook groups or in internet forums that suggest herbal remedies protect against the coronavirus. In those groups, it's easy to observe the seductive nature of personal stories. A friend's nephew whose case of the measles was cured by tea tree oil is more engaging than a dozen dry public health announcements. We're biased to sometimes think narrative detail is linked to accuracy, when that's not always the case. Plenty of engaging, specific examples can capture your emotion and empathy, according to Amanda J. Barnier, a professor of cognitive science at Macquarie University. "Perhaps by identifying with the details, it rips you away from a critical evaluation of the evidence underlying it," she said. One study conducted by Dr Goldwater, which has so far been presented at a conference, attempted to understand the power of positive and negative anecdotes. Participants in the study were assessed on how stories about the impact of medical treatments on 'Jamie' (a fictional person) affected whether they would use the same treatment. Even though they were told that the treatment worked for most people, knowing one negative personal story  about Jamie's symptoms failing to improve  often made study participants report that they would not want to take that treatment. "When you are affected by an anecdote, what you are potentially doing is generalising from a single case to your life," he said. "But it's possible that it just made you feel icky [about the treatment]." It's easy to laugh off Goop's vagina candles, but the threat of medical misinformation shouldn't be taken so lightly, writes Olivia Willis. Humans like explanations that help them predict how the world works. We are constantly thinking about cause and effect. That can lead us to a bias called 'illusory causation', where we interpret a causal effect when there really isn't one. If you take herbal medication for a cold and then get better two days later, you might assume the medicine did the trick. "The bias people have is they don't think, 'wait, what would have happened if I didn't take that herbal medication?'," Dr Goldwater said. "Well, you probably would have gotten better in two days just the same." This is why scientific studies use randomised control trials that give half the test subjects the medicine and half none  to test that assumption. We are also susceptible to what's called the naturalness bias. Put simply, "natural stuff is good and artificial stuff is bad". "It's just this heuristic that helps you make a decision, a shortcut," Dr Goldwater said. There will always be scenarios where that rule does not hold true. This article contains content that is not yet available here. We like explanations and rules, but our problem is that we want them fast. "Critical thinking about information you're presented with often requires people to slow down and think about it carefully and weigh the evidence," Dr Barnier said. She recommends taking your time when dealing with health information, and considering its source. "Who's saying this? And where is the information coming from? And what is it based on?" Dr Goldwater said we must also be willing to interrogate our own beliefs and why we came to conclusions.  "If you are constantly sceptical of your own thinking, that is potentially the best way to vet yourself," he said. But this is a struggle, even if it's your life's work. "If anything, being a cognitive scientist just makes me question my own thinking," he said. "You can always, in retrospect, realise you fell prey to one of these biases, because these are biases that are so ingrained to how we think." 
WA Government reduces Serco services at Fiona Stanley Hospital in scaling back of privatisation
The WA Government will spend up to $93 million to bring 650 jobs back under state control, in a significant scaling back of privatisation of services at Fiona Stanley Hospital (FSH). The changes to the multi-billion-dollar deal with private provider Serco will see cleaning, catering, orderly and domestic assistant services brought back into the public sector over an 18-month transition. It follows the former Barnett government's decision to privatise non-clinical services at FSH in a 20-year deal with Serco. The McGowan Government said it was scaling back that deal at the first opportunity, with approximately 65 per cent of the Serco staff at FSH to be brought back into the public sector. Unions have celebrated the revised deal but the State Opposition has attacked the arrangement, labelling it the "most irresponsible time to make major changes to the health system" in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak. Premier Mark McGowan announced the new arrangement within minutes of confirming WA had its first suspected case of community transmission of coronavirus. The revised FSH deal will come at a significant cost, with a one-off transition bill of $12.9 million and ongoing costs of $8 million per year over the next decade. But Health Minister Roger Cook said the Government was meeting its pre-election commitment to bring privatised services back into public hands where possible. "We have been able to do this in an affordable way and one that ensures there will be a safe and smooth transition," he said. "What we are doing here is affordable because we have managed the state's finances." Mr Cook said the deal would benefit patients as well as staff. "We know that Western Australians like vital public servants to be in public hands," he said. "The contract itself interfered with seamless patient care. Other services currently provided by Serco will continue until 2027, with the option to extend to 2031. Serco Australia chief executive Mark Irwin said he was pleased much of the contract would continue, but dismissed suggestions it would improve patient care. "The services that we have delivered have been world-class services," he said. United Workers Union secretary Carolyn Smith said the deal was evidence privatisation did not work. "Orderlies could not touch patients and the contract was massively understaffed," she said. The Serco contract came under heavy criticism in its early days, with problems including surgical equipment that had not been properly sterilised and the payment of 200 staff to manage a hospital that had not yet admitted patients. An inquiry chaired by former under treasurer John Langoulant also revealed the $4.3 billion contract was signed without a stand-alone business case, casting doubt on whether the state was getting value for money. The deal also saw Serco paid more than $100 million to run the hospital in 2014, even though at that time it had no patients. 
Gold Valley Iron put into voluntary administration, leaving Kimberley contractors out of pocket
An iron ore company in Western Australia's East Kimberley has been put into voluntary administration only six months after restarting the mothballed Ridges mine, 165 kilometres south of Kununurra. At a meeting of creditors held on February 25, administrators from KordaMentha were appointed to Gold Valley Iron Ore (GVI), which was given the right to mine the Ridges iron ore deposit owned by Kimberly Metals Group in a deal last year.  It is understood work at Ridges stopped last week while administrators assessed the financial position of its operators from Gold Valley. KordaMentha partner Richard Tucker said early indications were that the company had racked up about $10 million of debt, and that local contractors had been left out of pocket. "Our role since our appointment has been focused on trying to find a solution to recommence operations, such that local businesses and the larger contract creditors could be supported [and] employees could go back to work," he said. "As part of that there's been a lot of good will from both the employees and the major contractors, and we were able to a get a non-binding term sheet where someone would provide several million dollars to recommence operations. "However, unfortunately, events superseded that and the right to mine was terminated by the owner of the mine; so the ability to continue to mine in the existing structure is now unlikely. "Gold Valley Iron has not yet been liquidated, it will be up to creditors to decide the future of that specific entity." Mr Tucker said Kimberley Metals Group owned the tenement, and that it would be up to it to decide on the future of the mine. KMG has been contacted for comment, but the ABC understands the company is making efforts to find a way to get the site back up and running in the coming weeks. It is yet another roadblock for the embattled Ridges iron ore project, which was put into care and maintenance in 2015 by KMG, laying off 220 workers following the mine's closure. The Chinese-owned group began operations in 2011 and also own the undeveloped, higher grade Matsu iron ore deposit 10km south of the Ridges mining operation. The company's chairman, ZhengZeng Du, is also Chair of Tangshan Ganglu Iron and Steel Co. Ltd, which is one of the largest privately-owned steel mills in China. KMG shipped 6.2 million tonnes of high-grade ore to China from the Wyndham Port until it closed its doors four years ago due to poor commodity prices. At the time it was a huge blow to the town, with several other big commodity projects also shutting up shop amidst a mining downturn in the region. East Kimberley Chamber of Commerce president Steve Sharpe said it was disappointing to see local business left out of pocket. "We're not sure of the details of exactly how many local contractors have been affected," he said. "We know there's been a lot of local business keen to support the start-up of the mine. Subscribe for the national headlines of the day. "The possibility that a project like Ridges starting up was bringing to the community, it was a bit of hope for people and it's just really unfortunate this has happened. "It's certainly a huge blow in a region where Argyle diamond mine is heading towards closure, and people are bracing themselves for that." Mr Sharpe said another big resources or infrastructure project was needed to give the region a boost. It has also been a volatile time for iron ore prices in recent weeks due to the coronavirus outbreak. After reaching five year highs last year exceeding $110 USD per tonne, iron ore is now trading at $89 US dollars per dry metric tonne. Mr Tucker said investigations were in their early stages, but several factors had led to the present situation. "It would appear as though it's a combination of the fact it's a relatively low-grade deposit [and] the costs associated with starting up an operation and insufficient working capital to do so," he said. It appeared there were other early signs of trouble for the project when a dispute emerged between Gold Valley and Elmore Limited, a minerals processing company previously trading as IndiOre. A memorandum of understanding was signed last year which proposed Elmore process ore mined by Gold Valley at Ridges on a contractual basis. According to Elmore's quarterly report released on September 30, the company had "secured the mobile processing equipment required" but said it had been "repeatedly held back from commencing the contract".  Elmore "continued to try and work with GVI to resolve the impasse", the report said. Only three months later, Elmore announced to the ASX on January 14 that the mineral processing agreement had been terminated. "The contract stipulates that Elmore will be paid $1 million plus compensation for lost earnings due to the contract being terminated by repudiation," the company said. The announcement also revealed that Gold Valley Iron had started civil action against Elmore over the payment of plant equipment sold to it from a project GVI had acquired called Frances Creek mine in the Northern Territory. By February 17, administrators had been called in from Hall Chadwick, and then replaced by KordaMentha at a creditors meeting later in the month. Since that time several contractors have contacted the ABC and said they have not been paid for their work since Ridges restarted last year. Gold Valley Iron is a Perth-based private explorer that is part of the Gold Valley Group chaired by Singaporean businessman Mr Yuzheng Xie. According to its website the group has interests in mining, agriculture and energy in WA, the Northern Territory and Queensland. ABC has not been able to get in touch with a representative from Gold Valley Iron. 
Clear of coronavirus for 40 days, plan to reopen the Kimberley takes shape
When  and how  will it be safe for the Kimberley to reopen? It's a question generating plenty of discussion right across the north of Western Australia at the moment, as statewide restrictions designed to halt the spread of COVID-19 begin to ease. Would-be travellers are keen to head north on what's often an annual migration to escape the winter chill. And cut off from the tourist traffic that can make or break their year, businesses across the Kimberley are keen to get them over the border. But with 17 recorded cases, almost all linked to outside travellers, the prospect of a resumption in visitors also carries a degree of concern within the community. While some politicians and business representatives have urged an immediate reopening, community leaders have set their sights on June 18 for the region's tough travel restrictions to be lifted in a 12-point plan, backed by local government, medical and Aboriginal representatives and submitted to the State Government. With the exception of three cases in Broome, the majority of the Kimberley's 17 COVID-19 cases have been linked to travel  particularly locals and critical workers returning from interstate and overseas. The threat of the virus prompted local leaders to call for a lockdown, resulting in a joint State-Federal biosecurity regime enforcing the toughest travel restrictions in WA. Travellers must quarantine outside the region for 14 days, while travel to (but not from) remote Aboriginal Communities is banned under the threat of fines of up to $50,000 and jail time. But with no new cases for more than 40 days, Kimberley Aboriginal Medical Services (KAMS) CEO Vicki O'Donnell said the argument for restrictions was shifting. "In three weeks' time, you'd have to question why we wouldn't lift border security," Ms O'Donnell said. "We have to think about what's going to happen for the next 12 months  because without a vaccine, we are still a high-risk area." KAMS backed the reopening plan, and argued the Government needed to adequately support Kimberley health services to contain any further outbreaks. Access to rapid, widespread testing across the region would also need to be solidified. Any further lockdowns, Ms O'Donnell said, should be strategic and targeted, with provisions to evacuate at-risk patients. "Maybe locking down a town, as opposed to the whole Kimberley," Ms O'Donnell said. "You can't rule out the prospect of community transmission in Perth, and they're going to be moving around. "We're going to get three times more tourists into the Kimberley than we ever had." An outbreak in a remote community remains a nightmare scenario for the Government, and a key factor in their cautious approach to the Kimberley. Health staff, bolstered by reinforcements from Perth at the height of the outbreak, have used the lull in cases to drill how such an outbreak would be handled. Outbreak management plans, detailing how any further cases would be dealt with community-by-community, are also being worked on. Kimberley Land Council acting chief executive Tyronne Garstone said the restrictions were the right step, but the time was right for them to be lifted. "I think the actions put down by the State Government and the Federal Government were right on the mark," Mr Garstone said. "And that's really played a pivotal role in us being able to keep COVID out of the Kimberley." While some communities had experienced positive results including reduced violence, alcohol and drug abuse, the return of large numbers of current and former residents had also posed significant challenges. Mr Garstone hoped governments would continue to pay close attention to the unique nature of the Kimberley and its remote communities when they began easing restrictions. He said it was imperative communities were given the choice to open back up or remain in lockdown. "They have to understand that each community has their own threshold in regards to removing some of the restrictions," Mr Garstone said. "They'll have to be approached individually and asked, 'Are you comfortable with removal of some of the restrictions?'" While the Government's lack of immediate support left many in the region disappointed, the unified plan may ultimately count in the Kimberley's favour. A unified push from community leaders played a key role in the Government bringing restrictions in and could be a similar factor in them being lifted. "It's always great when you hear a clearly articulated, unified message from the community," Health Minister Roger Cook said. "I'm really quite excited by it and keen to engage." While stopping short of committing to the June 18 date, he said the Government was already working to extricate the region from the "clumsy" Federal biosecurity arrangements that expire on that day. "I think we should, potentially, be more ambitious," Mr Cook said. But he said any shift would still be done on the basis of medical advice, and local medical services being equipped to target and deal with any further outbreak. "Every time we ease a restriction, we increase the risk, so we have to do these things very carefully," Mr Cook said. "But, we do understand there has been a lot of pain in the community." He said some form of restrictions would have to remain in place, due to the Kimberley's vulnerable population, and remote communities would be consulted on how that would look. The prospect of an end to restrictions cannot come soon enough, with a June resumption in tourism allowing a disastrous season to be at least partially salvaged. A survey of local tourism operators released by Australia's North West Tourism this week indicated 26 per cent of respondents were anticipating, or had already recorded, losses of more than $300,000. But chief executive Natasha Mahar said the survey showed persistent interest in bookings for July onwards this year, right into 2021. "They're all wanting to come here and we need to try and let them come here," Ms Mahar said. "We can find a middle ground and make sure we look after our tourism operators and vulnerable communities at the same time." 
Amid coronavirus lockdowns, use of online domestic violence reporting tool spikes
When news of the coronavirus shutdowns began to break, Joan* says she felt sick. "He was going to be here 24/7, it was a nightmare," she told the ABC. Joan had been in an abusive relationship but felt she could access help when she needed. "He would go to work and there was time for myself," she said.  But the lockdown meant those moments of privacy were gone. She had been planning on leaving her partner. Now, that felt impossible.  "It is like being stuck, in the worst way possible. I felt hopeless. And then the beatings started," she said. Joan, whose name has been changed to protect her identity, ended up seeking help through an online chat function late one night. "Hopping on the phone and calling wasn't an option," she said.  In living rooms, hallways, bedrooms and kitchens across Australia, people have been increasingly using an online chat tool to seek help amid the COVID-19 lockdown. The national sexual assault, domestic and family violence counselling service 1800 RESPECT said between March and April, the use of its online chat tool had increased by 38 per cent. The organisation said the increase represented close to 1,000 people, with more than 4,000 people overall seeking help through its webchats in March and April. With attempts to rationalise the murder of Hannah Clarke and her children, we risk blaming the monster and not the man, Rowan Baxter, and the society that allowed these murders to unfold. The organisation said for online chats, March and April in 2020 had been the second-busiest two-month period in the organisation's history.  "Between April 2019 and April 2020, we have seen a 20 per cent rise in the use of the tool overall," a spokeswoman from 1800 RESPECT said. The national hotline said it had also seen a spike in phone calls, but mostly after midnight while partners were asleep.  "Counsellors are now taking more calls from people who at the time of contact are in the same house as someone who uses violence," the spokeswoman said. "More people are calling the service late at night, closer to midnight. This may be when the person using violence is asleep or the conversation cannot be overheard." People were getting in contact for three primary reasons: experiencing violence while in isolation, being more fearful due to being in isolation with a violent partner, and concerns that escape was no longer an option. The spokeswoman said callers would often arrange for a special code word to be used if the caller felt they were at very high risk and needed police called to their home. Susan Crane runs Dawn House, a frontline domestic violence shelter in Darwin.  Unlike the national hotline, she said calls "dropped off a cliff" when the lockdown began. "There are many deaths where unfortunately we don't come across the names of the individual," says a researcher into violence against women. "It was absolutely eerie, we were expecting to be run off our feet," she said. "Usually the phone rings off the hook, then we were getting one or two calls a day, sometimes none. "It's really disturbing; it isn't as if domestic violence has stopped overnight in the NT." According to the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, it is estimated that in Australia 2.2 million adults have experienced physical or sexual violence by a current or previous partner since the age of 15. "What we were hearing during the lockdown was abusive partners controlling women 24 hours a day, including their phone calls," Ms Crane said.  In the meantime, Joan is worried about others still in need of help. "We can't be forgotten at this tough time," she said. "I feel for all of those women who haven't been able to get help yet, I feel like one of the lucky ones." *not her real name. 
Should Australian states ditch coronavirus border restrictions? Even medical experts can't agree on that
Two of the doctors advising the Australian Government on its coronavirus response have said they cannot see the medical reasons for some states keeping their borders closed. Yet these very states and territories  the Northern Territory, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania and Western Australia  insist they are staying shut because of medical advice. Why are there such different opinions? Australia has some of the strongest coronavirus border controls in the world, which are credited as a key reason for our success in suppressing the spread of the virus. The Australian Government closed its international borders to non-citizens and non-residents on March 20, on the advice of its medical expert committee. This body  officially called the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC)  includes all the state chief health officers and is chaired by Australia's chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy. "We knew that the greatest risk to uncontrolled transmission was in imported cases," Professor Murphy told a Senate inquiry last month. "As an island, we were in a position of perhaps doing border measures more effectively than other countries, so the unanimous health advice of the Health Protection Principal Committee was that we should do that." While the AHPPC has advised the Government on issues ranging from elective surgery to when elite sport should be resumed, it has not made any recommendations around state borders. It left this to the states, which acted quickly after Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced he was shutting Australian borders. Tasmania was the first state to close its borders, on March 20, followed by the Northern Territory, South Australia and Western Australia on March 24 and Queensland, the day after. The ACT, NSW and Victoria chose not to. Deputy chief medical officer Paul Kelly said the committee had decided "not to have a decision on [state] borders". "As has been the case with much of the national advice, specific issues related to states are to be done at that state level," he said earlier this week. New South Wales, with its tourism-dependent economy, has been calling for the opening of all state borders to help stimulate struggling local businesses. But the closed-off states  particularly Queensland and WA  have strongly resisted, saying they will open up when their medical advisors say it is safe to do so. Confusingly, two of the Australian Government's top medical advisors have indicated that they do not think it is a problem, medically speaking, for state borders to be open. "From a medical point of view, I can't see why the borders are still closed but, as I said, that's for the states and territories themselves to decide when that time is right for them," Professor Kelly said. His words were echoed by fellow deputy medical officer Nick Coatsworth. "I think it is not clear what medical reasoning [there] is for state borders to remain closed, but that of course is a matter for state premiers," he said. "I think the premiers of Queensland and Western Australia have made it very clear in the media that it is going to be their decision." Yesterday, Professor Kelly further explained why he did not think it was particularly risky to allow interstate travel. "With so few cases in the community  less than 600 active cases, with many people who have come from overseas and are currently in quarantine  the risk of opening borders or plane travel is very low," he told SevenWest Media. The closed states clearly believe they have made the right public health decision, with the statistics backing them up. The NT and SA are in the elite club of states with no confirmed cases of COVID-19, as is the ACT. Only NSW and Victoria recorded new cases of coronavirus on Friday, with both States experiencing community transmission. After intense media attention on the border issue this week, WA's Chief Health Officer, Andrew Robertson, took the step of releasing a statement to explain his advice. He argued that WA's decision to shut interstate and regional borders, as well as enforce a quarantine for interstate arrivals, was "highly effective in reducing interstate cases and eliminating community spread". "COVID-19 cases fell from 35 cases reported on 24 March 2020 to 14 cases by 09 April 2020. Since 29 April, there have only been 3 new cases, all directly related to travellers." His Queensland counterpart, Jeannette Young, shared similar statistics with RN Breakfast on Friday, saying there had been no new cases acquired from interstate in the past 40 days. Both Dr Robertson and Dr Young said it would not be safe to re-open borders until community transmission was eliminated in NSW and Victoria. "It's local transmission where you do not know where that has come from. That's the concern," Dr Young said. They both said their condition for reopening is for these states to record 28 days  or two virus incubation periods of 14 days  without community transmission. "Until community spread is eliminated in the affected jurisdictions, which will require at least a month to confirm, opening of the interstate borders is not recommended," Dr Robertson said in his statement. "If the community spread is controlled, relaxation of the interstate borders could be considered after the introduction and assessment of the impact of phase four [interstate border closure]." The closed states also appeared wary of re-opening the borders too soon and then facing the prospect of reintroducing shutdowns if there was a fresh wave of infections. Even as her state marked the significant achievement of having no active cases of coronavirus, South Australia's Chief Public Health Officer, Nicola Spurrier, refused to use the label "coronavirus-free". "This is obviously a really fantastic milestone for us   [but] it's no time to be complacent," she said. "We do not want a second wave. If we did have a second wave, the only way people know how to deal with that is to shut things down." 
Coronavirus has cancelled major events and it may be a while before we are ready to return to crowds
Football without crowds, stadiums without concerts and festivals on the chopping block  COVID-19 has ushered in an uncertain new era for major public events. As restrictions ease and we make our way back to pubs, restaurants and public spaces, there are still many factors at play before we get back to our regular calendar of big events. One of the biggest hurdles to getting back in a crowd could be psychological. With constant reinforcement about physical distancing and staying in your 'bubble', have you found yourself briefly taken aback seeing people in crowds or close together in old photos or in TV shows? University of Queensland social psychology Professor Jolanda Jetten has experienced this and said it was an example of how rapidly we have accepted a new world of restrictions. "It tells you how quickly we've adapted our behaviours, how quickly we've seen closeness to others as something that's dangerous," she said. Professor Jetten said it would take some adjustment for people to return to big events. "The whole idea now of avoiding a crowd has almost become second nature," she said. "We've developed the habits of distancing and to overcome that habit, we're only willing to do that if we know it's 100 per cent safe." At the same time, Professor Jetten said she thought people had missed the feeling of belonging  and the sense of shared experience  that being in a crowd could foster. "I think people have been grieving to go back to normal, to go back to not just meetings with 10 other people, but also to be part of crowds and thousands of people that gather," she said. "We really are social animals, we love to be in a crowd, we love to be immersed  I really wonder how that will play out in the next couple of months." The logistics of planning an event long in advance are complex  and that's before you throw in the added uncertainty of what COVID-19 restrictions could look like. Hobart's Dark Mofo festival pulled the pin early on its 2020 event, saying a last-minute cancellation would have caused even more financial devastation. Perth's annual Australia Day Skyworks celebration, which draws hundreds of thousands of people on January 26 to the banks of the Swan River, was the subject of fierce debate earlier this week after the City of Perth announced it would consider not going ahead with the event, eight months out from the big day. Chair commissioner Andrew Hammond told ABC Radio Perth the commissioners had requested further reports on the event, which would be considered next month. "We simply don't know what the social distancing requirements are going to be at that time and I guess everybody can understand, if you've got 300,000 people sitting around the Swan River watching a fireworks show, there's going to be issues if there's social distancing requirements in place," he said. "If we let things go on as they are, we'll spend over $2 million for an event that might or might not go ahead." Kirsten Holmes, Curtin University's dean of research for the faculty of business and law, said the lead-in time for an event such as Skyworks was crucial. "The idea that we might not be able to get together in a big crowd come January is hard to envisage at the moment, because it seems like we've really got on top of the COVID situation," she said. "I can see why people are saying 'why on earth are they talking about cancelling it now, when it's so far out?' But they will be planning it  a decision has to be made." As AFL and NRL prepare players to get back on the field, University of Western Australia faculty of health and medical sciences executive dean Jon Watson said he was hopeful fans would be able to join them at stadiums later this year, provided there remained little to no community transmission of COVID-19. "Once we know there's no community transmission, the chance of someone going to an event that has the virus becomes very small," he said. "We know from the data on the virus that there's less risk from outdoor events than indoor events, so I think that something that happens in a big outdoor stadium would be more likely to go ahead than, for example, basketball indoors. "But we still need to think about physical distancing, we need to think about hygiene, there needs to be a robust cleaning schedule in place." Professor Watson said events without allocated seating  gatherings of crowds at festivals, or even golf, where spectators could walk around following competitors  would likely face a longer wait. "If someone's positive [for COVID-19], that's a different situation to someone going to a football game or a rugby game," he said. "I think [less controlled events] will probably be more difficult to police on a short-term basis. "In Australia we're going really well, but I think those more controlled events will come first." Australia's Chief Medical Officer, Brendan Murphy, has previously said distancing measures would likely stay in place until a vaccine could be found. With a vaccine still estimated to be a year away at best, some big gatherings look to be off the table in their usual form.  Major upcoming agricultural shows across Australia  including the Royal Melbourne and Adelaide shows, and Ekka in Brisbane  have been axed for 2020, with organisers of Perth's Royal Show cautiously looking on as September draws closer. Royal Agricultural Society of WA president Paul Carter told 6PR Radio a decision was likely from late May to late June. "As each day goes by, running the Royal Show in its traditional timeslot becomes less likely, even though we continue holding out slim hope," Mr Carter said. ABC health editor Norman Swan told triple j a return to music festivals should not be expected anytime soon, with Splendour in the Grass postponed from July to October. However, organisers are hopeful the Falls Festival will run as planned later in 2020. Professor Jetten said dense crowds brought the added problem of people underestimating risk. "At festivals, people engage in unsafe behaviours  sharing cups, unsafe sex behaviours, all sorts of things  because they see others as safe, 'we're all together, all good'," she said. "That's precisely what you should be concerned about with coronavirus." The experts agree a return to major events will look very different to anything we have seen before. Overseas, sporting codes that have emerged from behind closed doors have spaced out people in seats to ensure physical distancing. Professor Watson said he thought there would be changes in terms of queueing to get into big events, possible temperature screening and a need for stepped-up emergency care  along with spaced seating and asking people not to change seats to enable contact tracing. "We already have plans with medical services at major events, but I think there'll be an extra layer to that in terms of how we manage anyone if they suddenly become unwell and how they're taken from the event to a place of isolation in a hospital," he said. Beyond hygiene and health precautions, Professor Holmes said she could also see some environmental benefits on the way. "There's already a move within the sector towards not producing paper copies of anything  maybe doing away with wristbands, anything where people could be touching," she said. 
Animal rescue work hit hard by coronavirus restrictions
Thousands of animals are saved from regional pounds every year but that rescue work has been hindered by the coronavirus pandemic. Carey Edwards from the Australian Working Dog Rescue Initiative said the organisation's revenue has dropped by more than half. "There has been a huge impact on donations, of course, because everyone needs their money to survive," he said. Annual events where the organisation raised funds and awareness have all been scrapped. "We would have been out there demonstrating and showing everyone what our fantastic rescue dogs can do," Mr Edwards said. "That's all gone, as is all the royal shows we do  they're all cancelled," he said. The biggest problem has been getting to country pounds to save animals.  Codirector of the organisation, Di Edwards, said regular commercial transport options have been very limited. "So we've had to get volunteers to drive their own vehicles up to these pounds, which are thousands of kilometres away from anywhere central," she said. Ms Edwards worried that more dogs were being put down than might normally be saved. "We suspect more dogs are being killed in council pounds because of the impact that these restrictions are having on the operations of rescue organisations," she said.  However, there have been other rescue groups still managing to do regional pound runs. "We have contracts with various rural pounds throughout Victoria and New South Wales and we have transport runs that go up there regularly," Ms Edwards said.  Shortages of volunteers, along with social distancing restrictions, have made everything harder. "It is very difficult when you have animals involved and you've got to pass animals to other people," Ms Edwards said.  Shelters that normally allowed people to drop-in and see animals now required visitors to make appointments. At the same time, interest in adopting animals has been greater than ever because of the number of people working from home during the pandemic. "The phone just isn't stopping, we've never quite experienced it like this before," Ms Edwards said. "Once a puppy goes up on our social media page, within 15 minutes we're getting 100-plus phone calls." That has meant getting in first to adopt a pet has been harder than normal. And Pets Haven vet nurse, Jordan Ellard, said some people's frustrations have been spilling over. "I have had people abuse me and be rude just because they have tried to call several times" she said. "I do try to explain to them that I'm really busy I'm getting a lot of calls at the same time." The RSPCA has been experiencing the same challenges as other animal rescue organisations. But head of operations at RSPCA Victoria, Tegan McPherson, said the increase in demand to adopt pets has been welcome. "We're adopting more animals than we normally do at this time of year," she said.  "Animals that might have waited a bit longer to find the right home seem to be finding homes a lot more quickly." Ms McPherson's advice to people who were keen to adopt a companion animal was to be patient and be careful. "It's really important to do your homework and make sure the animal welfare organisation or rescue group is reputable," she said.  "Make sure that those animals have been health checked, come vaccinated, microchipped [and] desexed."  The last dog to be adopted from the Australian Working Dog Rescue Initiative was Harry, a fox-terrier-kelpie cross. His adoption was a foster fail, which occurred when a foster carer could not part with an animal when it came time for adoption. Only in this case it was Ms Edwards who could not bear to say goodbye to Harry. "Oh he just made us laugh," she said. "He's just so funny, so full of vim and vigour. He just does the funniest things." Harry was now one of a gang of seven dogs that Mr and Ms Edwards have not been able to part with over the years. All of which are now trained in herding and agility, and have been spending their lives showing the world just what abandoned working dogs could be capable of if given some love and a second chance. 
Coronavirus 'border wars' reignite old state rivalries that date back to Federation
Paul Keating once famously said: "If you don't live in Sydney, you're just camping out." Sydneysiders cheered while noses across the rest of the country were put firmly out of joint. It's one episode in a longstanding rivalry between Australia's states that flared again this week as various premiers traded blows over coronavirus border restrictions. WA Premier Mark McGowan fired the first salvo, evoking the Ruby Princess debacle in response to NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian's calls for Western Australia, Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania to open up their borders. "And they are trying to give us advice on our borders, seriously?" he quipped. It followed another jibe from Mr McGowan last month when he responded to questions about a NSW man fined $1,000 for contravening social-distancing restrictions by eating a kebab. "I find it hard to believe someone was going for a run and then stopped to have a kebab," he said between chuckles. "In any event, they do things differently in NSW." Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk also stuck in the boot, telling NSW it was "not going to be lectured to" by a state with the highest number of coronavirus cases.  Social commentator Jane Caro says the coronavirus pandemic has strengthened existing state rivalries, particularly against NSW. "NSW seems to always be the state that everybody hates in the same way that Manly Warringah is the football team everybody hates as well," she says. But she says the animosity is not without reason. "I think it's fair to say if the Ruby Princess wasn't allowed to disgorge everyone on Sydney Harbour and go off to the four corners of Australia we'd have had hardly any cases, so maybe NSW has a little bit of ground to make up," she says. Acrimony between the states is nothing new. It's seen each year as various sporting codes take the field, as states vie for the tourism dollars and the prestige that comes with hosting international events.  And it's a rivalry as old as Federation itself, when long-standing competition between Sydney and Melbourne resulted in the country's two largest cities vying to become home to the nation's capital. The Constitution had the final say: Parliament would be located within NSW but not within 160 kilometres of Sydney. Until it was built, Australian Parliament would meet in Melbourne. Greig Pickhaver, one half of comedy duo Roy and HG, says coronavirus has "broken Australian society down into states in a way that I never thought would happen again". "I'd love the State of Origin series to be on now because never before in say the last decade and a half has the animosity between NSW and QLD been wound up so far  it would be a magnificent spectacle for rugby league fans," he says. "Who knows? The Sheffield Shield may become the best cricket competition in the world at this rate!" Caro likens the rivalry to "a bit like siblings in a family" and says it's mostly light-hearted. "They might really love you but if they get an advantage over you they're sure as hell going to leverage it as much as possible and tease you about it unendingly. "I totally accept that there's probably a little bit of delight in being able to say to NSW, 'Ooh I don't know if you guys can be trusted,'" she says. "The more infuriating NSW finds that, the more satisfying that probably is for some of the other states." Having lived in three different states across Australia, Miah Tutuki-Crockett knows interstate rivalry when she sees it. "There's always been a bit of a thing between NSW and Queensland," the 25-year-old says, citing rugby league as the main source of tension. Ms Tutuki-Crockett, 25, grew up in Perth and later moved to Noosa on Queensland's Sunshine Coast but says Sydney has captured her heart. "It's a great place  there's always lots of events going on music, the food is amazing here, so I really like Sydney." Asked if any of her interstate friends rib her for moving to NSW, like a true Sydneysider she replies: "No I feel like most of them end up moving here at some point anyway." 
Coronavirus workplace rules create woolly problems for Tasmanian shearers 
New coronavirus workplace rules for shearers have created a backlog of unshorn sheep and could worsen a shortage of shearers in Tasmania. The new COVID-19 shearing operation protocols require shearers and other workers in shearing sheds to keep at least 1.5 metres away from each other as they work. To achieve this, shearing stands have been removed from sheds reducing the number of shearers working in each shed. "We've got a spare stand in between us, we've got to wait for the roustabouts to get the fleece before we walk in and get another sheep, and just make sure we stay away from each other," said veteran shearer Tony Bryant. Shearing contractor Ray Edwards said the number of other workers in each shed had also shrunk. "We normally have a wool presser and another shed hand, we've only got the one shed hand," he said. Sheds have been upgraded to allow for extra hygiene, and shearers are discouraged from travelling together and sharing rooms. Mr Edwards said following the new rules in sheds  often built at the turn of last century  was challenging but necessary for the health of workers. "I've got people that are older, some have got a bit of a heart condition, some have got a bit of asthma, and I've had a few health issues," he said. "I'm just trying to do the right thing by everyone, because I don't want the industry shut down." With fewer shearers working in each shed, fewer sheep can be shorn each day and shearing flocks takes longer. Mr Edwards said that had created a backlog of unshorn sheep as his crews and others spent longer at each property. "Instead of having a job cut out, I've got to wait, so the other farmers got to wait  it's just a snowball effect," he said. When Bothwell wool grower Will Bignell recently had 4,000 lambs shorn, only three shearers worked in the shed instead of the usual four. "It's 25 per cent less sheep, which adds up, it slows our whole system up. We lose efficiencies as well, that's the other thing," he said. Mr Bignell was unsure whether shearers would finish at other properties in time to shear his ewes before they gave birth to lambs in spring. "We'll have to basically look at lambing in wool which is not ideal and not the best animal health outcomes that we can achieve," he said. There was already a shortage of shearers in Tasmania when coronavirus struck. Shearers from the mainland have been deterred from travelling to Tasmania by the mandatory quarantine periods when they enter the state and, in some cases, when they return to the mainland. "If they come over from the mainland they've got to isolate here for 14 days, then when they go back they've got to isolate for 14 days," Mr Edwards said.  "They're going to lose 28 days, Just say they earned $300 a day and work that out. It's a lot of money." He fears the shortage will worsen as the season continues. The coronavirus work rules have also reduced training opportunities for new and aspiring shearers. A novice shearer and wool handler school is held every July at the historic Malahide property in Tasmania's Fingal Valley. Australian Wool Innovation trainer Matthew Haney said while the school usually catered for 20 students, this year the intake had been halved. "The 10 rooms that normally would be shared by two people will only be able to accommodate one student," he said. "Also in the shearing shed the 1.5-metre rule must be adhered to as much as practical, which would be impossible with a large group." The market price for wool has dropped as factories in China and other countries closed and retail customers stopped buying new clothes. Some wool growers are stockpiling fleeces until prices rise again while others are still selling at the reduced price. The coronavirus work restrictions also coincided with the breaking of a years' long drought in key sheep farming. Will Bignell had been forced to hand-feed his flock for two years as little rain fell. "It's taking its toll, your normal coping mechanisms are kind of gone," he said. "I think it's a good thing it rained. If it had been dry and we'd gone into this, it would have been soul-destroying." But he said the industry would overcome the new challenge. "That's typical of agriculture, we're a resilient bunch, we take a knock and we get back up and keep going," he said. 
Elvis biopic to resume filming in Queensland post coronavirus, Screen Queensland says
Elvis has not left the building  that's the message from film industry insiders who say the team behind Baz Luhrmann's biopic is "very committed" to restart filming in Queensland post coronavirus. Production of the film at Village Roadshow Studios on the Gold Coast was among the first casualties of the industry in Australia after Tom Hanks, who plays Elvis's manager Colonel Tom Parker, tested positive in March. Screen Queensland chief executive Kylie Munnich has been in contact with the film's production team and told the ABC as soon as restrictions have been lifted they planned to pick up where they left off.  "I know that they just closed the doors on stages and have stored the sets because they are absolutely committed to restart that film," she said. "They had done so much work in pre-production. "It's definitely their intention to get back into production here and they loved being in Queensland  they told me that many times. "I know they want to get back here and get started." Actor Michael Balk from the Actors and Entertainers Benevolent Fund Queensland said the impact of COVID-19 had left thousands of people in the film and television industry out of work. "Like Elvis in Queensland  there are around 1,500 people who are employed in a production like that," he said. "Obviously it effects everyone from the performers in front of the camera through to the crew, through to the people who are supplying to a film like that." Ms Munnich said two other major productions in Queensland  Harrow and Jonathan M. Shiff's Bureau of Magical Things  had also stopped work, as had several other smaller-scale productions.  "Just those three productions alone employed hundreds and hundreds of people," she said.  "There would be projects that were also getting ready to go into production where they've had to halt, so it's had a profound impact." The Media Entertainment and Arts Alliance (MEAA) said an estimated 4,500 film technicians, creators and performers remained out of work.  Michelle Rae from the MEAA said many had been looking for work in other industries while still paying off gear and equipment. She said she was worried the industry was at risk of losing decades of experience as people moved into other jobs out of necessity. "It is day by day for them. There are lots of conversations with banks and debt holders about being able to push that back," she said. Mr Balk said he shared those same concerns. "We're looking at a potential skills loss, where people that have been working for decades, if not longer, will suddenly be forced to change career," he said. Even though restrictions are easing, Mr Balk said the industry would still have challenges with social distancing. "Sound operators can't get close to the talent, performers can't have intimate scenes without breaking that 1.5-metre barrier," he said. Ms Munnich said some in the industry had been finding ways to produce work on a smaller scale. "Whether it's television commercials, film or TV [or] our games industry which is very robust in Queensland, you'll find people trying to come out from under this," she said.  Not all workers are eligible for government grants, given the nature of their role and the industry. Screen Queensland has launched several initiatives, including a $3.3 million support package aimed at allowing productions to keep working behind the scenes to prepare for the moment the "green light is given". "You can imagine that there will be a bottleneck ... in Queensland, Australia and internationally," Ms Munnich said.  "There'll be this real surge in production needing to happen." 
How NSW restaurants and pubs will be different from June 1 after coronavirus restrictions ease
NSW coronavirus social-distancing restrictions for restaurants will soon be the most relaxed in the country  bar the Northern Territory. But things will look very different inside pubs and eateries when hospitality venues in Australias worst-affected coronavirus state are allowed to open their doors to up to 50 people from June 1. Venues have been warned that people must stay 4-square metres from each other, and cannot stand, mingle or dance. There will also be no buffets or shared cutlery and bookings will be limited to 10 people. Diners will have to register their name and phone number when they enter the so they can be contacted in the event of an outbreak. The latest round of easing restrictions will come as a relief to many restaurateurs who have struggled to operate amid the 10-person limit. Aref Jaroud, the restaurateur behind a Facebook post which slammed a diner for cancelling without notice, said the industry was in a "world of pain". Mr Jaroud owns and operates Low 302 in Sydney's Surry Hills, and said when the mystery four-person booking, under the name Aimee, didn't show up, he vented. The post, told mystery diner Aimee there was "a special place in hell" for her for costing the restaurant 40 per cent of its capacity last Saturday evening. But now, Mr Jaroud realises "there could be many reasons why someone is a no-show". The viral post said Low 302 was now requiring deposits upon booking confirmations, but Mr Jaroud said he had changed his mind. As more patrons fill restaurants, bars and cafes from June 1, Mr Jaroud says "there is a health and safety concern that I think takes precedence". "I would worry that if someone for instance got the sniffles, they may decide to still go out so as not to lose their deposit. "I'm not putting a booking fee above the possibility of that scenario." He said he understands the frustration of the hospitality industry, but he said charging a booking fee was not the answer. "I'm one of them, but just now, more than ever, we need to place health and safety first," he said. "We may need to take a few no shows on the chin, and try to be patient." Mr Jaroud said he was contacted by dozens of restaurant owners, sharing their own tales of no-show bookings. "I cannot believe every one of them was due to an emergency, or a situation where someone in the group couldn't have picked up the phone, or emailed in a cancellation," he said. Mel Gatfield from United Workers Union NSW said regulations should urgently be put in place to protect workers and customers from coronavirus as the 50-person limit rolls out. "COVID-19 has devastated the hospitality workforce," she said.  "Now, as restrictions are loosened this workforce is apprehensive, members are very concerned about returning to work in confined spaces."  Mr Gatfield said the hospitality industry as a whole had an "appalling track record when it came to looking after workers".  "Hospitality workers must be able to go back to work in hospitality venues from 1 June knowing that strict measures are in place to ensure everyone's safety," she said. 
Our relationships are laid bare in coronavirus lockdown
Crouched in the back of the cab I have a choice: open the ABC News app and immediately inform myself of all the news I will need to know and broadcast that day or  in that gloom before dawn, and in those few moments I have to myself before the serious business of the day overwhelms me  do I open the Twitter account "Am I the Asshole"? This lockdown has revealed to us, and to those living with us, sometimes confronting truths about our deeper natures. People who had no intention of being so closely quartered have been thrown together by necessity and have spent more time, more intensely, with each other than maybe they ever have before. It's one way to cement a relationship. It's also one sure-fire way to burn the whole damn thing to the ground. This addictive, astonishing and sometimes quite unbelievable account (and there are many who think quite a deal of it is just made up) allows people to post to Reddit a personal dilemma about their behaviour which can then be discussed and voted on. The Twitter account @AITA curates some of the most intriguing. It turns out COVID-19 hasbroughtabout a global, real-time laboratory-condition series of psychologicalexperimentsthat are now being written up  not by Harvard professors, but byfreaked-out or deeplyguiltypartners in an all-access online forum. Journalism may be the first draft of history, but these posts are most certainly the key documents of a major sociological phenomenon. Some of the dilemmas are staggering. AITA for permanently deleting my girlfriend's Instagram account? For storming out of a dinner because they put potatoes in the chilli? For being mad that my boyfriend dedicated his book to OJ instead of me? For asking that my neighbour not bring her screaming baby outside? And in one of the greatest examples of narcissistic personality disorder you'll ever read, for taking my girlfriend's secret poetry that she doesn't want read and publishing it as a song? So many of the problems arise from two people suddenly living together. They bring their stuff  dolls, oversize soft toys, poetry, a total lack of maturity or empathy  and dump it all into the middle of a relationship that's just not ready for it. Or ready for anything at all. There are the man-babies, and the mean women and the selfish fathers, and punishing mothers. And while some of the posts are genuinely distressing cries from the heart  the wife who just wants her husband to get off the video games and look after their six-month-old  others are the primary material for what should become a modern treatise about a generation of people raised to be breathtakingly selfish. Yes, a lot of it is hilarious, but a great deal is also a fascinating insight into the biggest challenge that we all find ourselves in: where do my needs come right now? First or behind someone else's? Am I capable of re-ordering them? Check it out. Be as judgy as you like  that's what's it about  but then take a moment and ask yourself: are you one of them? Subscribe to join Virginia Trioli each Saturday morning for the best long reads, analysis and features from the ABC. This weekend we have evidence that some of us are trying very hard not to be that a-hole. Jack Gow is using COVID19 to getunapologetically closer to his male friendsand change the dynamic of his friendships for the better. My colleague Madeleine Morris is trying to do her bit toreduce her family's carbon footprint by cutting out meat(but you try telling that to a bunch of tofu-refusing kids). And we haveblack cockatoosfor you: the greatest bird in the Australian skies. No correspondence will be entered into on this. Thank you. Have a safe and happy weekend, whether by twos or 10s or 20s  and here's your weekly reminder THAT IT'S NOT OVER YET. Dear God, please keep your distance. Our over-talented but underemployed performers are doing what they do best for you this weekend  getting on with it, and the enduring treasure that is Belvoir has gathered cast from around the world to perform songs from many of their shows, sung by original cast members forBelvoir in Concert. If you tune in to watch, please donate just as you'd so love to buy a ticket and be there with them One of my secret loves, Virginia Gay  the woman who breathed life back into Calamity Jane in her show-stopping Australian performances  will be hosting this fabulous event. So wrap your arms around someone you love, tell them your heart's secret, andslow danceto this tonight. Virginia Trioli is presenter on Mornings onABC RadioMelbourne and the former co-host ofABCNews Breakfast. This article contains content that is not yet available here. 
Coronavirus Australia news: Cyber crime on the rise during coronavirus pandemic, United Nations warns, as it happened
The United Nations says the coronavirus crisis is moving the world towards increased technological innovation and online collaboration, increasing our vulnerability to cyberattacks  and it is estimated one such attack happens every 39 seconds. Look back on Saturday as it unfolded. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery Gladys Berejiklian may have told people to start booking their holidays a few days back, but we're still a way off from travel restrictions being lifted on June 1. For the time being, recreational intra-state travel is off limits. Deputy Premier John Barilaro said while regional NSW will welcome visitors with open arms when the time for travel does come, holidaymakers should call their planned accommodation venues and attractions to ensure they will be open and confirm their bookings before travelling. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery There's a headline I never thought I'd write. But here we are. Rent prices in Sydney have dipped to unprecedented levels and vacancies have soared amid the coronavirus pandemic. Inner Sydney currently has a 13.8 per cent rental vacancy rate, compared with 6.5 per cent last year, the latest data from SQM Research shows. Weekly rental prices in the CBD have also fallen by more than $100-a-week, compared with the same time last year. Here's the full story. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery Hi Brett, The Federal Government made a decision to ban Australians from travelling overseas on March 26 and there areno plans to lift that rule until at least the end of the year. There are exemptions to it, however, and the information on that can be foundhere. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery University of the Sunshine Coast nursing program leader Matt Mason says the biggest difference between those countries and Australia is the level of risk. "The main difference is that we simply don't have the same burden of disease that America or the UK or some of the other countries have," he says. "The risk of catching the disease is much, much lower here because we simply don't have it circulating to the same extent that America has." By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery 
Japan was feared to be the next US or Italy. Instead their coronavirus success is a puzzling 'mystery'
Crushingly crowded public transport. The world's oldest population. A huge outbreak on a cruise ship. A state of emergency without penalties.  It sounded like a recipe for a coronavirus catastrophe, and there were fears among public health experts that Japan could become the next Italy or New York.  But it hasn't happened. The country hasn't exactly escaped unscathed. About 800 people have died and more than 16,000 have been infected in a country of 126 million. But in comparison, more than 90,000 Americans have died from COVID-19.  And Germany, which is widely hailed for its coronavirus containment strategy, has suffered about 8,000 deaths in a country of 83 million people. The World Health Organization (WHO) sees Japan as a "success story" according to WHO senior adviser Nikki Shindo. "People are saying it's a Japanese miracle ... [they're saying], 'I don't really understand', because Japan received more than 400,000 tourists from China during Chinese New Year," Dr Shindo told the ABC. "Japan had cases much earlier than anybody else, but it kept the case count really low, considering its population density and movement of people." Japan was repeatedly criticised over a lack of testing, which some health experts said would hide the true picture of the virus' spread in the country.  But still, the number of deaths has not exploded, the state of emergency has been lifted in most of the nation and the Government says the country is on the path to containment. Pinpointing exactly why Japan has been able to keep deaths comparatively low has been a puzzle, according to Japan's Nobel laureate Tasuku Honjo. "We may expect another wave," the immunologist warned.  "But so far this is still a mystery to most of the medical scientists: why Japan, with such a relatively legally loose [state of emergency] system has quite remarkably [fewer] deaths and infections."  Professor Honjo said it would take some time to work out conclusively what was happening, but there are a range of theories currently being examined.  "People in this country are generally very clean. They like to be clean, they wash hands very frequently on normal days and they don't kiss, they don't hug," he said.  "There's also [a] hypothesis that the BCG vaccination will help with boosting up the basic level of immunity." The BCG is a tuberculosis vaccination which is not widely used in Australia, the US or UK. But it's still given to children in Japan. There is Australian-led research looking into the BCG vaccine as a possible protection against COVID-19, but research leader Professor Nigel Curtis said it would take "many months" before they would have any results. Kazuho Taguchi from Japan's Health Ministry said he couldn't "conclusively pinpoint" a reason for Japan's success, but the nation's strong health system and the fact many Japanese people wear masks may have helped.  "Japan has universal health coverage ... and we are proud of this healthcare system that is not behind any other nation," he said. Once the virus began to spread in big cities the Government was forced to declare a state of emergency on April 7.  But Japan's "lockdown lite" was nothing like the strict measures seen in other countries, and largely depended on people volunteering to stay home.  Restaurants were allowed to stay open for certain hours, and some businesses said they had no other choice but to keep trading because they felt the Government compensation on offer was inadequate The lockdown has since been lifted in 42 of 47 regions, and infections continue to fall in the capital, it could end in the greater Tokyo area as early as May 25.  One of the major differences between Japan and many other high-income nations is its philosophy on testing.  Rather than offer a COVID-19 test to everyone who wants one, Japan's regime has been far more "strategic" to prevent the overloading of hospitals, according to the WHO's Nikki Shindo. As of a few weeks ago, Japan was only doing about two tests for COVID-19 for every 1,000 people. Australia, by comparison, is doing more than 40 tests per 1,000 people. Kazuho Taguchi from Japan's Health Ministry said tests were performed this way so that people wouldn't flood testing centres, potentially triggering another wave of infection. Anyone who tested positive was swiftly isolated in hospital. But it has not all been deliberate. An initial lack of testing capacity and an overwhelming shortage of personal protective equipment for sample collectors and lab technicians also slowed the rate of tests.  But Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's expert advisers said that even as the number of tests increased, the number of positive cases continued to decline.  Despite criticism of Japan's comparatively low test rate, Dr Shindo said strategic testing was key to prevent the system from being overwhelmed. "Only one in five people are transmitting the [virus]. So you were just wasting the test to detect 80 per cent of the people who don't really create the second generation of infection," she said.  Dr Shindo believes criticism of the low testing rate is unfair.  "What Japan did was really fantastic, because if you test everyone, for what? It's not influenza. You don't have the disease-specific antiviral," Dr Shindo said.   Japan has since relaxed its guidelines for testing, and local governments have also been transferring people with mild symptoms to hotels, freeing up hospital capacity. Dr Shindo backs that strategy because it helps ensure positive cases don't travel to hospital unless absolutely necessary. "That movement will put other [parts of the] population at risk because those people will take a taxi [or] public transportation. They move," she said.  "I think it's wise not to do too many tests and really focus on the cluster detection and management of severe patients." But Professor Kenji Shibuya from the Institute for Population Health at King's College London remains concerned. With the country at times struggling to contain the virus over the last few months, he says they need to scale up capacity to prepare for a possible resurgence of cases. "Even if this wave is managed with some luck, Japan should not consider that it is a success. [It] needs to put the system in place ... to prepare for a resurgence, which will inevitably happen," he said. It's fair to say not all has been perfect in Japan.  There was the sudden and unprecedented crisis of the Diamond Princess cruise ship that was thrust upon Japan in February, and left 712 passengers and crew infected. Governments around the world  including Australia  organised charter flights to get their citizens off the ship docked at the port of Yokohama because of concerns about the quarantine. When passengers were let off the ship, it was initially feared that the virus would spread widely in Japan, but that didn't happen. And despite Japan's world class medical system, some medical facilities have struggled to cope with an influx of patients A surge of infections within some hospitals in the country forced them to suspend outpatient treatment and cut back on other services. An ambulance carrying a man with a fever and difficulty breathing was rejected by 80 clinics and forced to search for hours for a hospital in downtown Tokyo that would treat him. Some hospitals were refusing suspected coronavirus patients because they were not designated infection hospitals, did not have enough equipment, or feared the infection would spread inside the facility.  Emergency medicine experts said this put extraordinary pressure on critical care centres. But there are signs the hospital system is now stabilising in many parts. The Tokyo Metropolitan Government said as of May 19, there were fewer than 679 positive COVID-19 patients in hospital, and only 42 were in intensive care or on ventilators.  Professor Kenji Shibuya warns that there's no cause for celebration just yet. "Even though Japan did not impose a strict lockdown but a voluntary stay-at-home measure, people did follow it well and kept social distancing at the level of a strict lockdown in other countries," he said.  He also believes Japan got "lucky" that the virus was mostly contained to 13 regions. "We have to be really careful about the decision to lift the declaration [of a state of emergency]," he said. And while current figures show that the overall mortality rate in the capital Tokyo for the first three months of this year fell compared to the same time last year, Professor Shibuya is urging caution.  "There is a time lag between the onset and death, so we have to carefully look at mortality in April and May," the Professor warned.  Signs suggest the initial public health challenge may be under control.  The mission for Japan now is to both prepare for a second wave and start rebuilding the world's third largest economy, which has now entered a technical recession. 
UK to introduce mandatory 14-day coronavirus quarantine for all international travellers
The British Government has announced a mandatory 14-day coronavirus quarantine for all incoming travellers from overseas. The move, which does not come into force until June 8, has angered airlines who fear it will devastate the already frail industry. Under the rules, announced by Home Secretary Priti Patel, all international arrivals  including British citizens  will be required to self-isolate for 14 days and provide details of where they will be staying to the authorities. "Now we are past the peak of this virus, we must take steps to guard against imported cases triggering a resurgence of this deadly disease," Ms Patel said during the Downing Street daily press conference. "We are introducing these new measures now to keep the transmission rate down and prevent a devastating second wave. "Arrivals will be required to travel directly from their port or airport of arrival, preferably by car, to an address where they must then self-isolate for a fortnight." She said those who breached the quarantine in England could be fined 1,000 pounds (A$1,863), and that spot checks would be carried out by health and border officials. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Those whose accommodation does not allow for self-isolation will be set up in facilities provided by the government, but at a cost to the traveller. The quarantine measures will not apply to those arriving from the Republic of Ireland, and there are also exemptions for freight drivers, medical professionals and seasonal agricultural workers. Critics have questioned why the measures have been introduced so late, with Britain only enforcing quarantine on travellers coming from China and northern Italy at the start of the coronavirus pandemic. Airline bosses said the measures would have severe repercussions, with Michael O'Leary, chief executive of low-cost carrier Ryanair, saying they would be "unenforceable and unpoliceable" and would be ignored. "Introducing a quarantine at this stage makes no sense and will mean very limited international aviation at best," Tim Alderslade, chief executive of industry body Airlines UK, said. "It is just about the worst thing [the] government could do if their aim is to restart the economy." The Government said the quarantine measures will be reviewed every three weeks. ABC/wires 
NRL to proceed with single-referee system when play resumes after coronavirus break
The dispute between the NRL and the referees' union has been resolved, with the whistleblowers agreeing to the league's move to proceed with one referee for the remainder of the season. Under the deal, 22 full-time referees will be employed both this year and next with the one-referee system to be a "trial" that is reviewed at year's end. The referees' association, the Professional Rugby League Match Officials (PRLMO), had been planning to go before an arbitration hearing at the Fair Work Commission after a decision by the Australian Rugby League Commission to return to one on-field referee. But the union has now reached a deal to have a single official for the remainder of the year, and for part-time referees who are not required to retain a $500-a-week payment. The system will be reviewed at the end of the year by representatives of players, coaches, referees and the NRL management. ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys said the six-again rule for ruck penalties would also be introduced. "This is an excellent outcome for the game and all its stakeholders. Can I thank the individual referees for the way they conducted themselves during todays discussion," V'landys said on Friday. "It was heart-warming to see their desire that nothing stands in the way of the 28th May commencement of our great game and they want to be an integral part of its success. "The new rule changes will make our game faster and more entertaining. Most importantly it will address the biggest on-field issues which are speed around the ruck, and the eradication of the wrestle." The deal marked a win-win for the NRL after days of acrimony between the game's executives and the match officials.  The referees' union had infuriated the NRL on Friday by accusing it of overlooking player safety, saying administrators were "arrogant" and were like a "bull in a china shop" in rushing to make changes. "It's simple, today's game is safer with two refs," the PRLMO said in a statement. "On numerous occasions, the second referee has picked up potential causes of harm to players which were not detected at the same time by the other three match officials, nor the bunker. "This includes tackles, holds and throws that can cause significant injury. But this does not appear to concern the league's bosses." The union claimed that 80 per cent of ruck penalties are spotted by the pocket referee, who has been eliminated in the NRL's new model. Mr V'landys insisted that under his plan there would be extra qualified eyes on the ruck, with officials who had previously been pocket referees now acting as touch judges. Both they and the bunker will be given license to communicate with the central referee on the ruck as part of the changes approved by the commission. Mr V'landys said eliminating the pocket referee would save close to $2 million in a full season. ABC/AAP 
Two issues show how coronavirus has changed politics: industrial relations and energy 
It's amazing how a few employers putting 1500 into a form, instead of 1, can change the colour of your day, if you are a government feeling the weight on your shoulders of carrying the wages of 6 million workers at a cost of $130 billion. Those employers putting in how much each worker was expected to get from the Government's JobKeeper scheme, rather than how many of their workers were going to get it, had made the cost and employment fallout of the pandemic look even more terrible than it was. Until Friday that is, when someone noticed the problem and the number of people on the scheme was sliced by 2.5 million and its cost to "just" $70 billion. It's an immense relief of course, though no-one is suggesting it changes the underlying realities of the economic outlook with unemployment still forecast to reach 10 per cent. And it doesn't change the politics. If you were looking for some markers of how COVID-19 may have changed the way politics is conducted in Australia, two of our more fraught issues provided them this week: energy policy and industrial relations. What they seem to show is that pandemic produces a combination of some significant shifts around the edges, some urgent new pressures to actually address long-running sores, and quite a lot of "as you were" rhetoric and non-action. In the case of energy, there has been a flurry of activity, including the release of the King Review (the final report of the expert panel examining additional sources of low-cost abatement), leaked advice from the COVID commission advising the Government on an economic comeback, and the Morrison Government's Technology Investment Roadmap discussion paper "that will bring a strategic and system-wide view to future investments in low emissions technologies".  A pragmatic summing up of all the words involved would be "quite a lot about gas, not a lot about coal". Look, there were the usual hoary old chestnuts that rear their heads every time the Government has another attempt at re-booting the energy (and, dare one say, climate change) discussion: carbon capture and storage, soil carbon sequestration, nuclear power, blah, blah, blah. The Government has even re-discovered the potential joys of electric cars, after the whole unfortunate "Labor will steal your ute" diversion last year. Germany is doing what Australia says it can't  shutting down its coal industry. But what seems most significant is the lack of kowtowing to coal, beyond some talk of upgrading existing coal fired power stations. Some people might see this as either reasonable, or still too much coal. But to those watching the quivering contortions of the Coalition on coal, and all that talk about high efficiency, low emission coal plants just last year, the silence would seem to be deafening. So we have a significant, if relatively quietly made, change in rhetoric on coal, some greater urgency in thinking about affordable power generation for industry  given the sudden focus on the fact we may have to actually, like, make more things  and then quite a lot of what we have heard time and time again. This last bit, unsurprisingly, notes that renewable energy is already the cheapest form of energy and will remain so well into the future, though there needs to be a confidently-based transition fuel in the meantime. As analysts have pointed out, much of the roadmap bears a striking resemblance to a 2017 paper with a very similar name: the Low Emissions Technology Roadmap. The good news for those weary of the energy policy wheels spinning with little traction, but many acronyms, is that the subject is unlikely to get much air space, other than a general mention of gas, when the Prime Minister delivers an address at the National Press Club on Tuesday. Scott Morrison will be talking economic recovery and what will drive it, with a heavy emphasis on industrial relations. There are two aspects to the industrial relations debate at present that prove an interesting test of the COVID politics. The timing of one of them is completely outside the Government's control and goes to the heart of the issue exposed by the pandemic: the casualisation of the labour market. On Thursday, a full bench of the Federal Court made a ruling on the common understanding in law of what constitutes casual employment. Until now, it has been that casuals are those paid an extra 20 to 25 per cent loading in lieu of permanent employee entitlements. But now the Court has defined them by their pattern of work instead, finding that a worker, ostensibly a casual under his contract, but with regular and predictable shifts, is entitled to permanent employee benefits. Casual workers and microbusiness owners forced to isolate or to work less fear what could happen to them or their businesses, with no paid leave available to them. Depending on your perspective, this is a judgement that could either have economically catastrophic consequences, or will hardly affect anyone. It is certainly the case that it applies to a particular set of circumstances involving a labour hire company in the mining industry. And the judgement upholds another one made in a separate case two years involving the same labour hire firm, Workpac. Beyond that, some employers were arguing the retrospective decision could result in employees going back to "double dip" and claim backdated benefits for years of work and that it could apply broadly across sectors like hospitality and retail. Others, including the ACTU, insist that it should be seen clearly as a "loophole that labour hire companies have been exploiting to undermine job security and pay". For now, the Industrial Relations Minister is keeping his powder dry, awaiting indications of whether the case may be appealed in the High Court, but not ruling out legislation to try to clarify the matter. For it does raise inevitable questions about just what does constitute casual work in the broader workforce, at a time when the weak links of so many workers to their place of employees  as casuals  has cut such a conspicuous swathe through the economy and people's lives. The casualisation of the workforce  and insecure work  has been a big issue for the unions for some years but it is one that now has immense bite across the economy. What makes the Government's ultimate response to this issue is that it seems determined to maintain the spirit of cooperation with the unions that has built up through this crisis, a determination which has seen it this week officially put the contentious "ensuring integrity" bill  which would make it easier to deregister unions and union officials  in the freezer. That makes the question of how Morrison presents himself on the industrial relations issue next Tuesday all the more interesting. Both unions and employers have long expressed their dissatisfaction with the enterprise bargaining system set up by the Keating Government. What was once a system designed to help break industrial relations out of centralised wage fixing and allow for flexibility at the individual enterprise level has now itself become ossified. Unions argue it is not fit for purpose in an economy much changed over the past 25 years from large workplaces to small ones where the bargaining power of individual employees is much reduced. Employers argue that layers added to the system  such as the "better off overall test"  have made it unworkable. It's become easier for many to go back to the industrial award system which was supposed to gradually wither in significance and scale over time and so which also has its problems. The Government insists that it wants to step right away from the antagonistic politics of WorkChoices, and step back to allow employers and employees to work out how a new system should work. The Government's role, sources say, is just setting up the process for achieving that. The question therefore will be what mix of significant change, urgent new pressure, and "as you were" will emerge on Tuesday, and how it will drive the political battleground between now and the next election. Laura Tingle is 7.30's chief political correspondent. 
Bungle in coronavirus stimulus JobKeeper could be good in more than one way for the budget's bottom line
The JobKeeper bungle now means the Federal Government is essentially $60 billion richer, which is good news for the budget's bottom line. Economists say the savings should be used to taper off the payment for businesses who need it An error between the number of employees businesses estimated would be covered by the scheme and the actual amount currently receiving the payment forced the Australian Tax Office and Treasury to revise the total number, and cost, of the scheme down. The departments now say the scheme will cover 3.5 million workers, down from 6.5 million, and cost around $70 billion, down from $130 billion. Danielle Wood from the Grattan Institute said that, unsurprisingly, the difference in the amount will go towards softening the blow on the federal budget when it is handed down in October. "The Government has announced what we thought were around $195 billion in financial measures, $130 billion of which was the JobKeeper package," she said. "So, the $60 billion saving will mean the deficit is probably a bit smaller than we expected it to be." Ms Wood said if the revised number of employees accessing the scheme was an indication the economy was doing better than forecast, that could have other beneficial flow-on effects for the budget. "First of all tax receipts, obviously if we're not in such a big hole as we thought we were, that may mean that income taxes and company taxes are higher than a lot of us were expecting," she said. "It can also potentially mean lower spending on payments although, as we know, the unemployment rate has jumped up and we still have a lot of people on JobSeeker." But she also said it was important to note the difference between the estimated and actual figures could also be because businesses who had registered their interest in JobKeeper had not followed through. Economist and former Treasury official Warren Hogan said the error was significant and the savings were not entirely, as the Treasurer had claimed, "good news". "There isn't a sporting analogy for how big a miss this was," he said. "I'd be a little bit sceptical about painting a positive picture of this, I don't think that's right. "You've got a little bit more money than you thought you had, I don't think that means the economy is much better than you previously thought, although the Treasurer seems to think it is an indicator of that." Professor Hogan, who now works as an Industry Professor at the University of Technology's Business School, said it was "bad news" that the Treasurer had signalled none of the money would be redirected to other spending which would benefit the economy. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Both he and Ms Wood argued some of the unexpected windfall would be best spent on tapering out the JobKeeper program for businesses that were not back on their feet by September, when the scheme is currently due to finish. "They've got the flexibility to change the way the JobKeeper program finishes and that hard stop was always problematic," Professor Hogan said. He said there was going to be a lot of work for Treasury ahead in the fallout of the error, as they dealt with "a lot of moving parts" to adjust the budget and economic forecasts created on the original figures. On who was to blame, Professor Hogan said the error was one for Treasury, the ATO and the Government to learn from but it was "not a matter of blame". "This is all very new and when you rush things, especially at such a big scale, mistakes can be made," he said. "I don't know the mechanics and whether it was a silly error and someone should be held accountable within the ATO or Treasury. "We're in the biggest crisis anyone alive has seen from a society-wide point of view and we can't lay blame." 
Coronavirus update: Boris Johnson resisting calls to sack Dominic Cummings, South Korea records new cases as Seoul authorities close nightclubs
The British Government says Prime Minister Boris Johnson's adviser Dominic Cummings did not break coronavirus lockdown guidelines when he took a journey of 400km while he had COVID-19 symptoms, despite calls for him to face the sack. Elsewhere, South Korea has reported 23 fresh cases of coronavirus, mostly from the densely populated Seoul area where authorities shut down thousands of nightclubs, bars and karaoke rooms in a desperate attempt to stem transmissions. This story will be regularly updated throughout Saturday. This story is no longer being updated. For the latest coronavirus news and updates, follow this story. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson is resisting calls to sack his chief adviser, Dominic Cummings, after reports he broke the Government's own lockdown rules by travelling 400km while ill with COVID-19 symptoms. Mr Cummings, who masterminded the 2016 campaign to leave the European Union during the Brexit referendum, travelled to his parents' house in Durham in northern England in late March, when a strict lockdown was already in place. A lockdown that began March 23 stipulated that people should remain at their primary residence, leaving only for essential local errands and exercise, and not visit relatives. Anyone with symptoms was told to completely isolate themselves. Mr Johnson's office said in a statement that Cummings made the trip because his wife was showing coronavirus symptoms, he thought he was likely to also get sick, and relatives had offered to help look after the couple's young son. "Owing to his wife being infected with suspected coronavirus and the high likelihood that he would himself become unwell, it was essential for Dominic Cummings to ensure his young child could be properly cared for," a Downing Street spokesman said. "His actions were in line with coronavirus guidelines. Mr Cummings believes he behaved reasonably and legally."  The spokesperson said Mr Cummings stayed in a house "near to but separate from" his extended family. Dave Penman, the leader of civil servants union the FDA, said "the Prime Minister needs to understand how heartbreaking this lockdown has been for so many families and the sacrifices that have been made up and down the country." He said Mr Johnson must explain why "it looks like there is one rule for those at the centre of government and one rule for rest of the country." South Korea has reported 23 fresh cases of coronavirus, mostly from the densely populated Seoul area where authorities shut down thousands of nightclubs, bars and karaoke rooms in a desperate attempt to stem transmissions. The figures announced by the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention brought national totals to 11,165 cases and 266 deaths.  Thirteen of the new cases came from Gyeonggi province surrounding Seoul, which on Saturday ordered the closure of an additional 2,629 bars and karaoke rooms, bringing the number of shut entertainment venues to 8,363. But theres growing concern over the steady rise of infections in the greater capital area, where about half of South Korea's 51 million people live. More than 200 of the recent infections have been linked to clubgoers in the Seoul metropolitan area.  China recorded no new confirmed COVID-19 cases on the mainland for May 22, the first time it had seen no daily rise in the number of cases since the pandemic began in Wuhan late last year. China's National Health Commission (NHC) said in a statement that there were four new cases on the previous day, including an imported one in Shanghai and locally transmitted case in the north-eastern province of Jilin. China has seen a sharp fall in locally transmitted cases since March as major restrictions on people's movement helped it take control of the epidemic in many parts of the country. But it has continued to see an influx of imported cases, mainly involving Chinese nationals returning from abroad, while new clusters of infections in the north-eastern border provinces of Jilin and Heilongjiang have emerged in recent weeks. Wuhan also reported this month its first cluster of infections since a lockdown on the city ended on April 8, prompting authorities to warn that counter-epidemic measures could not be relaxed and to launch a campaign to test all of Wuhan's 11 million residents for COVID-19. The number of confirmed cases in the mainland stood at 82,971 and the death toll remained unchanged at 4,634.  Former NBA superstar Patrick Ewing is in isolation in hospital after testing positive. Ewing, who spent 13 of his 15 seasons in the NBA with the New York Knicks through the 80s and 90s, now coaches the men's basketball team at Georgetown University in Washington DC. The 57-year-old said he chose to share his diagnosis publicly to emphasise how dangerous the virus was. "This virus is serious and should not be taken lightly," he said. "I want to encourage everyone to stay safe and take care of yourselves and your loved ones. Now more than ever, I want to thank the healthcare workers and everyone on the front lines. I'll be fine and we will all get through this." Ewing won a national championship with Georgetown in his playing days, won two Olympic gold medals, was an NBA All Star 11 times and reached the finals with the Knicks in 1994. He was inducted into the basketball hall of fame in 2008. The WHO has identified South America as the new "epicentre" of the pandemic as the virus accelerates across South America. Brazil reported more than 2,100 deaths in the past two days, bringing its total toll to 21,048, as the number of cases soared above 330,000. The country now has the second-highest number of cases in the world, overtaking Russia and behind only the United States' official count of 1.6 million. The true number  both of cases and deaths  in Brazil is likely higher than the official count, as Latin America's top economy has been slow to ramp up testing. Across South America, infections rose and intensive care units (ICU) were swamped in Peru, Chile and Ecuador, countries lauded for imposing early and aggressive business shutdowns and quarantines. Many experts said the rising death toll across Latin America showed the limits of government action in a region where millions make a living in informal jobs and many police forces are weak or corrupt and unable to enforce restrictions. In Chile, more than 90 per cent of ICU beds were full last week in the capital, Santiago, where the main cemetery dug 1,000 emergency graves to prepare for a wave of deaths. Ecuador's Government declared a 2:00pm to 5:00am curfew in March, among other measures, but cases have swamped medical and mortuary services in the city of Guayaquil and the capital, Quito. Hundreds of people can be seen violating the curfew daily in Ecuadorian cities, many selling goods on the streets to earn enough to buy food. Malaria drug hydroxychloroquine, which US President Donald Trump says he has been taking, was tied to increased risk of death in a study of 96,000 COVID-19 patients, according to a paper published in the widely respected medical journal The Lancet. The study found people treated with hydroxychloroquine, or closely related drug chloroquine, had higher risk of in-hospital death when compared to those who had not been given the drug. Mr Trump has said he is taking hydroxychloroquine to protect against the virus, even though his administration has warned it can have deadly side effects. The head of Italy's pharmacological agency has also weighed in on the lack of data to suggest it is effective against COVID-19 as Italy conducts its own limited trials of the drug.  A Harvard University medical professor involved in the study said the results were clear. "We asked a question: is there any benefit whatsoever in using any one of these regimens in hospitalised patients with COVID-19? And the answer is a fairly conclusive no," Professor Mandeep Mehra said. "Then we asked if there's no evidence of benefit, is there evidence of harm  and that too was surprisingly a yes." Researchers reported a coronavirus vaccine developed by Chinese company CanSino Biologics appears to be safe and induced a rapid immune response in its first human trial. First-in-human studies, known as Phase I trials, are primarily designed to test safety. This vaccine did not cause any serious adverse effects, the researchers said in The Lancet, though they did report some side effects such as fever. Blood samples from the 108 vaccinated adults showed so-called neutralising antibodies and T-cell responses against the novel coronavirus, a sign of possible efficacy. "These results represent an important milestone," co-author Professor Wei Chen from the Beijing Institute of Biotechnology said in a statement. "The ability to trigger these immune responses does not necessarily indicate that the vaccine will protect humans from COVID-19. We are still a long way from this vaccine being available to all." Further studies will be needed to confirm whether the vaccine protects against infection. The first such trial is underway in Wuhan, China. The UN disarmament chief says the COVID-19 pandemic is moving the world toward increased technological innovation and online collaboration, but "cybercrime is also on the rise, with a 600 per cent increase in malicious emails during the current crisis." Izumi Nakamitsu told an informal meeting of the UN Security Council on Friday that "there have also been worrying reports of attacks against health care organisations and medical research facilities worldwide." She said growing digital dependency had increased the vulnerability to cyberattacks, and "it is estimated that one such attack takes place every 39 seconds." Estonia's Prime Minister, Juri Ratas, whose country holds the Security Council presidency and organised Friday's meeting on cyber stability and advancing responsible government behaviour in cyberspace, said: "The COVID-19 crisis has put extra pressure on our critical services in terms of cybersecurity." He said the need for "a secure and functioning cyberspace" is therefore more pressing than ever and he condemned cyberattacks targeting hospitals, medical research facilities and other infrastructure, especially during the pandemic. "Those attacks are unacceptable," Ratas said. "It will be important to hold the offenders responsible for their behaviour." Meanwhile, UN peacekeeping chief Jean-Pierre Lacroix says there have been 75 cases of COVID-19 in the UN's 13 far-flung peacekeeping missions, which have a total of 110,000 troops, police and personnel. There are 10 cases of COVID-19 in the mission in Congo, three cases in the Cyprus mission, two in Central African Republic and one each in Lebanon and the UN Truce Supervision Organisation in the Middle East. Iran has moved to open businesses, religious and cultural sites as it eases restrictions imposed to contain the coronavirus pandemic. Museums and historical sites are to reopen on Sunday to coincide with the Eid el-Fitr celebrations that end the Muslim holy fasting month of Ramadan, President Hassan Rouhani said. Holy shrines will reopen on Monday. Mr Rouhani had said last week that the shrines would open for three hours in the morning and three hours in the afternoon. Some areas of the shrines such as narrow corridors will stay shut. All workers in the country will return to work next Saturday. The President said last week that restaurants would reopen after Ramadan and sports activities would resume without spectators. Universities, but not medical schools, will reopen on June 6. Mr Rouhani said on Saturday that 88 per cent of the fatalities from COVID-19 in Iran were victims with underlying illnesses. Britain will introduce a mandatory 14-day quarantine period for travellers arriving from overseas from June 8, a measure that airlines have warned will devastate their industry. All international arrivals, including returning Britons, will be required to self-isolate and provide details of where they will be staying to the authorities. "Now we are past the peak of this virus, we must take steps to guard against imported cases triggering a resurgence of this deadly disease," said Home Secretary Priti Patel. She said those who breached the quarantine in England could be fined 1,000 pounds ($1,863), and that spot checks would be carried out by health and border officials. The quarantine measures will not apply to those arriving from the Irish Republic, and there are also exemptions for freight drivers, medical professionals and seasonal agricultural workers. Religious gatherings will resume in France after a two-month hiatus caused by the COVID-19 outbreak. The French Interior Ministry said the gatherings would be permitted from the start of June, but worshippers need to wear face masks and observe social distancing of at least 1 metre. The French Government had banned religious services until June 2 even though stores and other businesses started reopening last week. The Council of State, the country's highest administrative body, struck down the ban and the Government published a decree on Saturday allowing services to resume. France has announced 393 new cases of coronavirus in the past 24 hours, continuing a downward trend. Authorities say seven people appear to have been infected with the coronavirus at a restaurant in north-western Germany, in what would be the first such known case since restaurants started reopening in the country two weeks ago. The local government in Leer county said on Friday night that the cases, reported between Tuesday and Friday, led to at least 50 people being quarantined.  Previously, no new cases had been confirmed in the area for over a week. Germany started loosening its coronavirus restrictions on April 20 and that process has gathered pace recently.  Lower Saxony state, where Leer is located, allowed restaurants to reopen on May 11 with hygiene precautions. Colombia has reported its biggest daily increase in new coronavirus cases and deaths as the South American nation's Ministry of Health confirmed 801 new infections and 30 fatalities. Over a quarter of the new cases are in the capital city of Bogota, which has the highest number of COVID-19 infections in the country.  Nationwide, Colombia has diagnosed nearly 20,000 people with the virus. The nation has been on lockdown for nearly two months, though authorities recently began allowing some manufacturing businesses to begin operating. A wider economic opening is expected to take place throughout June. The nation's caseload has been comparatively smaller than other nations in the region: Brazil has confirmed over 300,000 cases and Peru over 110,000. Russian President Vladimir Putin said the outbreak in Russia has begun to abate, creating a positive environment for easing restrictions. Russia currently ranks third after the United States and Brazil in the number of infections with 326,448 cases, including 3,249 deaths. The Russian leader said a steady drop in new cases, from almost 7,000 new cases per day at the peak of the outbreak, to roughly 3,000 now, sets the stage for further lifting of restrictions. Mr Putin noted that the country's hospitals can accommodate over 165,000 coronavirus patients, and they are currently two-thirds occupied. He acknowledged the need to preserve hospital capacity in case of a new wave of contagion as restrictions lift. The COVID-19 mortality rate in Russia has remained remarkably low at about 1 per cent, drawing suspicions in the West that the country was under-reporting its death toll.  Russian officials have rejected the claim, saying that the low toll reflected efficient preventative measures and broad testing. A review of studies around the world by British researchers has found that people under 20 have a 56 per cent lower risk of catching COVID-19.  The review is not without its doubters, however, as some researchers such as those at University College London have said evidence remains "weak" on how likely children were to transmit the virus to others. "Our findings show children and young people appear 56 per cent less likely to contract COVID-19 from infected others," the review team said. "Susceptibility is a key part of the chain of infection, and this supports the view that children are likely to play a smaller role in transmitting the virus and proliferating the pandemic, although considerable uncertainty remains. "This new data provides essential evidence to governments around the world to inform their decision-making on whether to reopen schools and reduce or end lockdown measures." Hertz has filed for bankruptcy, unable to withstand the coronavirus pandemic that has crippled global travel and with it, the heavily indebted 102-year-old car rental company's business.  The US's number two car lease company's lenders were unwilling to grant it another extension on its auto lease debt payments past yesterday's deadline.  Hertz and its subsidiaries will continue to operate, according to a release from the company.  By the end of March, Hertz Global Holdings Inc  whose car-rental bands also include Dollar and Thrifty  had racked up $18.7 billion in debt with only $1 billion of available cash.  "No business is built for zero revenue," former CEO Kathryn Marinello said on May 12. "There's only so long that companies' reserves will carry them." In late March, Hertz shed 12,000 workers and put another 4,000 on furlough, cut vehicle acquisitions by 90 per cent and stopped all nonessential spending. Under bankruptcy protection, creditors will have to settle for less than full repayment. Its biggest creditors are banks, but the filing lists IBM, Lyft, United and Southwest Airlines as others owed between $6 million and $23 million each. The coronavirus pandemic is interrupting immunisation against diseases including measles, polio and cholera that could put the lives of nearly 80 million children under the age of 1 at risk, according to a new analysis from the World Health Organization and partners. In the new report, health officials warned that more than half of 129 countries where immunisation data were available reported moderate, severe or total suspensions of vaccination services during March and April. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "Disruption to immunisation programs from the COVID-19 pandemic threatens to unwind decades of progress against vaccine-preventable diseases like measles," WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said in a statement. UNICEF reported a significant delay in planned vaccine deliveries due to lockdown measures and a dramatic reduction in the number of available flights. "We have effective vaccines against measles, polio and cholera. While circumstances may require us to temporarily pause some immunisation efforts, these immunisations must restart as soon as possible or we risk exchanging one deadly outbreak for another," said Henrietta Fore, UNICEF's executive director. "We cannot let our fight against one disease come at the expense of long-term progress in our fight against other diseases." More than 40 of Africa's 54 nations have closed their borders, though some allow cargo and emergency transport, and 46 campaigns to vaccinate children against polio have been suspended in 38 countries, the majority of which are also in Africa. Measles campaigns have been suspended in 27 countries.  A spokesperson for British Prime Minister Boris Johnson says Government ministers trust principals to make their own decisions in allowing students back to school. The comment comes as the UK Government prepares to release its "roadmap" plan to reopen the UK. Mr Johnson's Government has faced criticism from some teachers and unions over their plan to reopen schools to some pupils from June 1.  They say the move is too early and others that they have little time to prepare buildings for a return under social distancing measures. "We continue to work closely with teachers, schools and the unions to address their concerns," the spokesman said.  "The roadmap sets out plans to get more children into schools in the safest possible way from June 1 at the earliest and we will set out more details on our plans as soon as we can. "We trust head teachers to know the best course of action for their own schools." US President Donald Trump has deemed churches and other houses of worship "essential" services and called on governors to allow them to reopen this weekend despite the threat of the coronavirus. "Today I'm identifying houses of worship  churches, synagogues and mosques  as essential places that provide essential services," said Mr Trump. He said if governors don't abide by his request, he will "override" them, though it's unclear what authority he has to do so. Mr Trump stressed the importance of churches in many communities and took issue with some of the businesses that had been allowed to reopen. "Some governors have deemed liquor stores and abortion clinics as essential" but not churches, he said. "It's not right. So I'm correcting this injustice and calling houses of worship essential." "These are places that hold our society together and keep our people united. The people are demanding to go to church and synagogue, go to their mosque," he said. ABC/wires 
How a confusing JobKeeper form made the coronavirus job crisis look worse than it actually is
It's a $60 billion error. After touting the impact of the $130 billion JobKeeper package  supposedly keeping about 6.5 million Australians connected to their employers while providing them with liveable pay  the Federal Government has acknowledged its figures were massively overstated. The package is instead projected to cost only $70 billion, and the Government has confirmed only 3.5 million Australians are actually receiving the payment. It's a huge difference from what was projected, but it comes down to about 1,000 businesses messing up their paperwork while applying for the scheme. Here's what happened. As with any application for government help, applying for the JobKeeper payment involves paperwork. More than 910,000 businesses have applied for the scheme, with 759,000 having already finalised their employee declarations, meaning they are eligible to receive payments. But some of those businesses, it seems, made mistakes while filling out their forms. According to the Australian Tax Office (ATO), which is responsible for administering JobKeeper payments, the errors weren't picked up because its focus was on processing payments as quickly as possible. One of the most common mistakes noted by the ATO was businesses mixing up the number of workers they employed with the amount they expected workers to receive. For instance, 550 businesses with just one eligible employee filled out the corresponding section of their forms with "1,500"  presumably in reference to the $1,500-per-fortnight payment made to all eligible workers. Those 550 businesses would have been responsible for an additional 825,000 people being added to the scheme  people that did not exist. But the ultimate discrepancy between the projected and actual number of people on JobKeeper was about 3 million. That still leaves a difference of more than 2.1 million people between the actual numbers and what was initially projected. When the Government first announced the JobKeeper scheme, it said it would cost $130 billion and help about 6 million employees. Those numbers were based on Treasury estimates on the projected need for the scheme. First estimates of the cost of the program were formulated at the height of the coronavirus crisis, with Treasury fearing the health impacts would be severe. As businesses began to register their interest in signing up for the scheme, the numbers appeared to be in line with initial estimates. But Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said on Friday that the economy was doing better than Treasury initially estimated and as a result, fewer people were signing up for JobKeeper. The 1,000 businesses responsible for the error represent just over 0.1 per cent of the 910,000 businesses that have registered for JobKeeper. But the $60 billion reduction in the projected cost of the scheme suggests that small portion was receiving nearly half the money allocated to the scheme. ATO Second Commissioner Jeremy Hirschhorn said it appeared those applicants misunderstood the question on their application forms. "With hindsight, perhaps the form could have been more straightforward, however I do note that only 1,000 of the 900,000 misinterpreted the question," he said. He said that no extra money was paid to businesses, as the question that was misunderstood by some was not linked to payments. "We ask a question for analytical purposes only, not for payment purposes," he said. "It made not one difference to the amount we paid." 
Clive Palmer threatens High Court challenge to WA coronavirus border closure after being denied entry
Billionaire mining magnate Clive Palmer has lashed out at Premier Mark McGowan after being refused entry into Western Australia, threatening a High Court challenge to the state's strict state border closure. Mr Palmer said he planned to take the matter to the High Court within days. "We'll be filing papers on Monday and proceeding with a declaration that the lockdown border closure of Western Australia is unconstitutional," he said. "And there's no reason for it at the present time, and that it's just an impediment to the workforce getting back to work and the prosperity of the state." Mr Palmer described the border closure as stupidity on the part of the WA Government. "What [Mr McGowan] is trying to do is against the Australian constitution, and I've got no doubt the High Court will slap him down very quickly," he said. "It's absolute stupidity. What's going to happen in three or four months when our economy is destroyed, people haven't got jobs. "That's not an outcome that we want." He said he would be referencing two sections of the constitution which stated trade and travel between states should be free unless lives were in danger. Mr Palmer also said he did not agree to "totalitarian" conditions which may have allowed him to receive an exemption if he had applied again. "The conditions that they wanted to place on me were that I would tell them where I was going, who I was talking to, and what the subject matter of those conversations was," he said "Which I wasn't prepared to do, that's my private business." The WA Police Force would not confirm if Mr Palmer's application was rejected, saying it would not comment on individual cases. But Premier Mark McGowan said he supported the WA Police Commissioner's decision. "The Police Commissioner makes these decisions based upon the law and the rules we've put in place to protect our citizens," he said. "So, I endorse the Police Commissioner's decision here. He's made it on proper grounds and with the correct purpose behind it. "[He] has clearly said to Mr Palmer that he can't fly in and fly out because he's not one of the exempt people. "The Police Commissioner has made many decisions to keep people out." Mr McGowan said so much work had been done to tackle the virus and he did not want to risk infection coming in from anywhere. "We are trying to keep the health of West Australians safe, and if Mr Palmer doesn't like it  he's subject to the law just like everyone else." WA has closed its borders to the east for the first time in history. Here's how you might be affected. "The medical advice we have is very clear, that our interstate border is important to protect the health of West Australians. He also said he hoped Mr Palmer's case did not have a chance in the High Court. "Well I hope not," he said. "We will fight him in the High Court. "All of our legal advice says that putting in place the rules to protect our state based upon health grounds is justified. "So we've done it for the right reasons to protect the people of Western Australia." 
NT Government establishes Territory Economic Reconstruction Commission to help coronavirus recovery
Chief Minister Michael Gunner says the Northern Territory is "uniquely positioned" to lead Australia's post-pandemic economic recovery and has established a special commission to figure out exactly how to capitalise on the crisis. In announcing the initial membership of the Territory Economic Reconstruction Commission on Friday, Mr Gunner said Australia was going through a "once-in-a-lifetime crisis" which could also be a "once-in-a-lifetime opportunity" for the Territory. Mr Gunner said post-COVID-19, Australia would have to become more self-reliant and the future for manufacturing was in the North. "We look at our solar reserves and our gas reserves and we are uniquely positioned to solve Australia's problems  we need to take advantage of that opportunity," he said. Mr Gunner said the Commission would investigate how to create jobs in the NT, attract investment and build on its strategic advantages  establishing it as "Australia's comeback capital". "We are a $26 billion economy right now, I believe we can be a $40 billion economy by 2030 with 35,000 new jobs," he said.  See more news and analysis about this year's NT election. But it will be at least six months until any of the Commissions' recovery plans become a reality  with an interim report expected to be handed down in late-July and a final report in November. Commission members include Gary Higgins, who retired as opposition leader in January; Infrastructure Australia CEO Romilly Madew; NT Treaty Commissioner Mick Dodson; Beyond Zero Emissions CEO Eytan Lenko; former NT chief minister Paul Henderson; former secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet Martin Parkinson and former CEO of Westpac Gail Kelly.  Next week, Mr Gunner will announce two more Commission members and its co-chairs.  Each of the nine members can earn up to $44,000 a year for their contribution, which means for six months' work each person can pocket up to $22,000  a total cost to the taxpayer of $198,000.  Opposition Leader Lia Finocchiaro, who took the helm at the Country Liberal Party in January, criticised Mr Gunner's fiscal management over his Government's term  claiming the Committee would not be necessary if the NT Government had managed the books better. "For four years under Labor our economy has become the worst-performing economy in the nation," she said. "It is not credible three months out from the election for the Gunner Government to say to Territorians: 'we have a plan'. The fact is, they don't." "The need for this reconstruction commission really reflects the inability of the Gunner Labor Government to to generate growth in our economy." Yesterday, the NT announced it had zero active cases of coronavirus, with all 29 confirmed cases of COVID-19 now recovered.  Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Despite the good news and calls from industry, Mr Gunner said he would not commit to a date when the NT's borders would re-open.  "I know that the calls for us to quickly relax our hard borders will grow louder," he said.  "The danger of coronavirus is still out there and we need to keep it out." Mr Gunner said as soon as there was a "hard date" for when the NT's strict border security measures would ease, he would make the announcement and ensure there was plenty of time for NT businesses to plan their recovery. 
US secures 300 million potential coronavirus vaccines after Government gives drug-maker $1.8 billion
The United States has secured almost a third of the first 1 billion doses planned for AstraZeneca's experimental COVID-19 vaccine by pledging up to $US1.2 billion ($1.84 billion), as world powers scramble for medicines to get their economies back to work. While not yet proven to be effective against the coronavirus, vaccines are seen by world leaders as the only real way to restart their stalled economies and even to get an edge over global competitors. After US President Donald Trump demanded a vaccine, the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) agreed to provide up to $US1.2 billion to accelerate British drug maker AstraZeneca's vaccine development and secure 300 million doses for the United States  which has a population of almost 330 million. "This contract with AstraZeneca is a major milestone in Operation Warp Speed's work toward a safe, effective, widely available vaccine by 2021," US Health Secretary Alex Azar said.  The first doses could be available in the United States as early as October, according to a statement from the HHS. The vaccine was developed by the University of Oxford and licensed to AstraZeneca.  Immunity to the new coronavirus is uncertain and so the use of vaccines is unclear. The US deal allows a late-stage, or phase three, clinical trial of the vaccine with 30,000 people in the United States. England-based AstraZeneca said it had concluded agreements for at least 400 million doses of the vaccine and secured manufacturing capacity for 1 billion doses. The first deliveries of the vaccines are due in September. Now the most valuable company on Britain's blue-chip FTSE 100 Index, AstraZeneca has already agreed to deliver 100 million doses to people in Britain, with 30 million as soon as September. Ministers have promised Britain will get first access to the vaccine. With leaders across the world surveying some of the worst economic destruction since World War II and the deaths of more than 327,000 people, many are scrambling for a vaccine. The US Government has struck deals to support vaccine development with Johnson & Johnson (J&J), Moderna and Sanofi, sparking fears the richest countries will be able to protect their citizens first. Sanofi's chief angered the French Government earlier this month when he said vaccine doses produced in the United States could go to US patients first, given the country had supported the research financially. "We have a lot of things happening on the vaccine front or the therapeutic front," Mr Trump told reporters at the White House when asked about the AstraZeneca announcement.  AstraZeneca said it was in talks with governments and partners around the world  such as the Serum Institute of India  to increase access and production and is speaking to various organisations on fair allocation and distribution. The Serum Institute of India, the world's largest maker of vaccines by volume, has dedicated one of its facilities with a capacity to produce up to 400 million doses annually to producing the Oxford vaccine. "We are scaling up on a conservative basis of about 4-5 million doses a month, to begin with," Chief Executive Adar Poonawalla told Reuters, adding the company was in discussions with AstraZeneca. A phase one and two clinical trial of the vaccine began last month to assess safety, immunogenicity and efficacy in over 1,000 healthy volunteers aged 18 to 55 across several trial centres in southern England.  Data from the trial is expected shortly. There are currently no approved treatments or vaccines for COVID-19. Governments, drug makers and researchers are working on around 100 programs.  Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Experts are predicting a safe, effective means of preventing the disease could take 12 to 18 months to develop. Only a handful of the vaccines in development have advanced to human trials, an indicator of safety and efficacy, and the stage at which most fail. "AstraZeneca recognises that the vaccine may not work but is committed to progressing the clinical program with speed and scaling up manufacturing at risk," a company statement said. Other drug makers are in various stages of vaccine development. US-based Inovio Pharmaceuticals said on Wednesday its experimental vaccine produced protective antibodies and immune system responses in mice and guinea pigs. And Moderna this week released positive data for its potential vaccine, which it said produced protective antibodies in a small group of healthy volunteers. Reuters 
People in other countries have been told to wear masks to protect from coronavirus. Australia isn't in the same boat
Coronavirus restrictions in Australia, are easing and that means there's more and more people getting out and about.  But COVID-19 is still out there and people have been urged to be cautious and stay vigilant about protecting themselves as best they can. In other countries, that protection includes a face mask  some choose to wear them, others have to. In Australia, though, the broad advice remains that most people don't need one.  Here's what we know so far about why that is and whether it's likely to change.  Many countries around the world, as well as some US states, have implemented various directions for people to wear face masks in public places to try and limit the spread of coronavirus. In parts of Asia, it's almost expected out of courtesy and safety to wear a face mask, but places like Singapore have now introduced fines if people don't wear one. And in the US, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends "wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain". Some states have enforced the use of masks in shops or other public spaces and the CDC has encouraged people to make their own cloth masks. In Australia, the current advice from the Federal Government is that the majority of people won't benefit from wearing a surgical mask and if you're well, you don't need one. There are different requirements for people who have returned from certain locations overseas, who think may they have been in contact with a confirmed case of coronavirus or who have tested positive, but broadly, surgical masks aren't strongly recommended or required. University of the Sunshine Coast nursing program leader Matt Mason says the biggest difference between those countries and Australia is the level of risk. "The main difference is that we simply don't have the same burden of disease that America or the UK or some of the other countries have," he says. "The risk of catching the disease is much, much lower here because we simply don't have it circulating to the same extent that America has." Australia's advice on face masks currently matches up with the World Health Organization, which recommends that if you're healthy, you only need to wear a mask if you're caring for someone with COVID-19. The quick answer is that healthy people still don't need to wear a mask. University of New South Wales infectious disease epidemiologist Abrar Chughtai says that advice isn't expected to change in Australia in the near future unless there's a significant spike in cases.  "It's not to protect healthy people, but to prevent the spread of infection," he says. "Generally, masks aren't very good to protect healthy people. "At some stage, if we have a second wave or widespread cases in the community, I'm sure the Australian Government will also recommend the use of masks but at this stage, you should not need one." There's also no rule that says you can't wear a mask  but it's important to think about how you're wearing it. "I don't think there's any problem with people wanting to wear a mask. But there are some things we need to consider," Mr Mason says. "The risks for the person who's wearing them come from how they interact with that mask in terms of taking it on and off, maybe reusing it, or fiddling with it while they're wearing it. "While a mask can do that because it's a physical barrier, what we do see is that people fiddle with the mask and are therefore putting your hands, which could be dirty, around your face." Nope, you don't really need gloves either. Gloves, like masks, can act as a barrier between your hands and whatever you're touching, but that means pretty much nothing if you still touch your face with gloves on. Dr Chughtai says if you're out and about, gloves can actually lead you to wash your hands less  and that's not good. "The virus will not transmit through skin, it needs a portal of entry and that could be through the mouth, nose or eyes," he says. "The general public don't need to use gloves. They should wash their hands and  avoid touching their face." Gloves are also similar to masks in that they're single-use. So, if you're not working in a high-contact environment and you're powering through a new pair every time you touch something different, that's a lot of demand and a lot of waste. "It's probably easier and better for the environment just to have alcohol-based hand sanitiser and clean your hands more frequently than to wear gloves," Mr Mason says. "Again, gloves give you that false sense of security that you're protected, but you're really not. "For people who are out and about or returning to work, that attention to detail on hand hygiene and trying not to transfer things from the environment to your face is going to be really important." Not much different from the advice we've been given from the start: wash your hands, don't touch your face and stay home if you're sick. As restrictions ease, that could become trickier  but Mr Mason says we have to try. "Something we're potentially likely to see here in Australia is people may put a mask on when they're not feeling 100 per cent and go to work or school, which is what we don't want people doing," he says. "Even though that mask is designed to stop someone coughing and spluttering over others, we don't want unwell people at work. "There's a whole range of social reasons why that's an easy thing to say and not an easy thing to do, because Australia is a highly casualised workforce." Dr Chughtai says the most important thing at this stage is to maintain social distancing and keep washing your hands. "We don't need to panic. People should focus on Government instructions like keeping a safe distance," he says. 
Allan Border says that if the coronavirus pandemic stops cricket's World T20, the IPL should not replace it
Former Australian captain Allan Border has spoken out against suggestions the IPL could be scheduled in place of the World T20 tournament later this year, describing it as a "money grab" by Indian cricket.      The World T20 is scheduled to run from October 18 to November 15 this year at various venues across Australia. However, the coronavirus pandemic  which has already caused the postponement or cancellation of many major sporting events in this country and overseas  has placed the future of this year's tournament in doubt. Reports this week have suggested that the Indian cricket board, the BCCI, is looking at trying to reschedule the lucrative IPL tournament for the same window as the World T20. Border told ABC's Grandstand Cafe radio program he would not agree with any attempt to run the IPL in place of the world tournament. "[I'm] not happy with that, the world game should take precedence over a local competition," Border said. "So, the World T20, if that can't go ahead, I don't think the IPL can go ahead. "I would question that decision [to replace it]  it's just a money grab, isn't it, that one? "The World T20 should take precedence, for sure." Asked what impression it would leave if India was able to go ahead with the IPL in an alternative window, Border said it would send the wrong signal to world cricket. "That would be just shut the gate, you know, India running the game. "They're pretty close to it now, but I suppose if you're responsible for 80 per cent of global [cricket] income, you're going to have a fair say in what goes on, I get that," Border said. "But I think the world game can't allow that to happen. "The home boards should stop their players going to the IPL, if that's the case. "I don't think you can have India superseding what the international game has in place. That would be going down the wrong path." Border was also asked about the Sheffield Shield's relevance to producing Australian Test cricketers, as questions are raised over the domestic competition's place in the schedule for the summer of cricket. "I feel it does [have relevance], if you talk to the players they are of that opinion as well, they love playing Sheffield Shield cricket," he said. "I think it still has the same relevance. I think it's got to be very hard to develop good, all-round cricketers, just through short-form cricket. "I think the long form of the game really does set your technique in place as a bowler or as a batsman, and then you can move into those other, shorter forms of the game. "There's a bit more power-hitting involved and different tactics as a bowler  developing your skills there, but the ultimate is, I think, to play that first-class cricket and that area of the game really develops your best players." The former Australian skipper said authorities would have to relax the rules on tampering with cricket balls, as the governing body looks at its response to the coronavirus. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. An ICC committee has this week recommended a rule change to stop the use of saliva to shine the ball, with a decision expected next month. "I suppose sweat and saliva are going to be very similar  if you've got the virus, you're going to pass it on, aren't you? Border said. "They will obviously have to relax the rules over polishing the cricket ball with some sort of substance other than sweat or saliva. "Whether you're allowed to scratch it, or put saliva to shine it on one side, or picking the seam  there's always something going on about the cricket ball, isn't there? "It's a very important part of our game, particularly the Test match game, or the longer-form game, rather than white-ball cricket. "It will be a challenge to see what the powers-that-be come up with  the bowlers have got to be able to do something with the cricket ball, not just let the ball go so the batsmen can smash it everywhere. "They've got to be able to shine the ball to try and extract some swing, that type of thing." 
Taste of Tasmania set to be cancelled for 2020 amid coronavirus restrictions
The Taste of Tasmania, which has been a key event on the Hobart social calendar for more than 30 years, looks set to be cancelled for the first time in its history as a result of uncertainty around the coronavirus pandemic and the council's struggling finances.  Hobart City Council officers have recommended the event  which usually costs ratepayers about $1 million  not go ahead this year "due to the number of uncertainties for large events coupled with Council's need to reprioritise funding for the coming year". Officers said the event would be "difficult to justify" at a time when the Council "really needs the money elsewhere". The Taste of Tasmania runs between Christmas and New Year's Eve, and averages about 30,000 attendees each day.  It is also a focal point for the Sydney-to-Hobart yacht race with festivalgoers celebrating the finish and watching the rest of the fleet arrive. Race organisers are yet to make any announcements about this year's event. The Taste decision is another blow to festival tourism after the mid-winter event Dark Mofo was also canned this year.  Hobart Mayor Anna Reynolds said the council's revenue was expected to fall by $22 million, or almost 20 per cent of the council's budget, due to the pandemic.  "We are having to make cuts in a whole range of places," she said.  "Given commercial sponsorship of the Taste would probably be very hard to get this year it would just be too risky for our ratepayers to fund a Taste that might not be able to happen, might have to be really small, and might be still very risky in the current environment. "An event as large and complex as the Taste does need lead time, and given the uncertainty around the tourism industry, the rules around large gatherings, but also just our budget as a city ... it's really not practical to have the Taste this year." In a statement, the Tasmanian Government said its funding contribution to the event of $500,000 over two years was secure but urged the council to find an alternative. "Now is not the time to abandon such an important event for Tasmania and while it is still too early to determine whether an event that attracts that many people can go ahead, we would encourage the council to work with all relevant stakeholders to plan for and identify options that work for all," it said. The Tourism Industry is concerned cancelling the event could be the final straw for many small stallholders who rely on the event for their survival.  Daniel Leesong, chairman of the Tourism Industry Council Tasmania and operator of Coal River Farm, said the Taste was too important not to go ahead, and a private operator might need to step in.  Mr Leesong said if the council could not take responsibility for the event, the industry would need to band together to find an alternative model "simply because it's a marquee event that's so successful". "Many of the stallholders rely on the Taste for their significant revenue source for their annual turnover," he said.  "Not only is it going to have an immediate negative impact for a lot of the smaller stall holders, but it's also going to have a potentially fatal impact long term.  "Those businesses simply won't be able to survive." Ghost Rock Vineyard owner Alicia Peardon has been forced to shut her cellar door and eatery for the time being.  The north-west based business has a stall at the Taste every year, and Ms Peardon said the expected cancellation was disappointing but understandable.  "It's a huge impact for Tasmania and for producers like us because we do rely quite heavily on it, but it's not surprising either given the current circumstances," she said.  "As long as social distancing is around it's hard to see how events like that can go ahead." Council officers have recommended consideration be given to a smaller New Year's Eve event. "There is no doubt 2020 has been and will be an extremely hard year for our community and our businesses and a smaller celebration of this could be a fitting way to see out the year," the report said. A decision on whether the Taste goes ahead will be made by the council on Monday.  
JobKeeper numbers cut by 3 million after Federal Government reveals accounting bungle in coronavirus stimulus program
The number of people on JobKeeper has been revised down by 3 million, with Treasury and the Australian Tax Office (ATO) blaming businesses for making "significant errors" in their applications. The estimated cost of the program has been nearly halved from $130 billion to about $70 billion. In a statement, Treasury and the ATO said the mistake came from businesses reporting how much financial assistance they expected to receive, instead of how many employees they thought would be eligible. "For example, over 500 businesses with '1' eligible employee reported a figure of '1,500' (which is the amount of JobKeeper payment they would expect to receive for each fortnight for that employee)," the departments said. ATO Second Commissioner Jeremy Hirschhorn said the error was discovered at the start of this week and the Treasurer was told about the issue on Thursday evening. "With hindsight, perhaps the form could have been more straightforward," he said.  "The question was reasonably clear, it is just unfortunate that 1,000 employers misunderstood it."   Based on the original estimates, Treasury believed the program would subsidise the wages of 6.5 million workers. That has now been revised down to 3.5 million. Federal Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said the error was "good news" and "importantly" the error contained "no consequences for JobKeeper payments that have already been made". "It is welcome news that the impact on the public purse from the program will not be as great as initially estimated," he said. Speaking on Afternoon Briefing, Mr Frydenberg said the Government would not be reallocating the rest of the forecast funding for JobKeeper to other areas, saying it was all "borrowed money" and the error meant less would have to be repaid by future generations. "This is a very uncertain time. I'm not blaming Treasury; I'm not blaming the ATO. No underpayments were made, no overpayments were made." Despite the Treasurer ruling out diverting the unspent money elsewhere, groups including the Council of Small Business, described the error as an opportunity for the Government to expand the scheme. "Migrant workers or people on visas who haven't been eligible so far, there's a lot of them that work for small businesses and I know it's been a concern for a lot of employers out there," Council chief executive officer Peter Strong said. "So, I suggest the Government should have a look at that." Federal Labor leader Anthony Albanese described the bungle as "an absolute shambles". "This is a mistake you could have seen from space," he said. "This is a Government that couldn't run a bath, let alone be good economic managers. "The fact is if you can't get this right, how can you get the economic recovery right?" The JobKeeper scheme is the centrepiece of the Government's coronavirus support package, offering businesses who have experienced a downturn in revenue a wage subsidy for eligible workers. The error was discovered by the ATO and Treasury after they analysed the amounts that were being paid out by the scheme to businesses and comparing them with the estimates of how many employees would be eligible. "It was not picked up by the ATO earlier as their primary focus in the first fortnight of JobKeeper payments was on ensuring that JobKeeper payments were paid promptly to those eligible for them, and not paid to those who were ineligible," the departments said. "These initial estimates from businesses of employees covered are not linked to payments, and so were not as carefully analysed." 
Amidst the coronavirus pandemic and heightened global tensions, China makes its move on Hong Kong
On September the 11th 2001, not half an hour after the second plane smashed into the twin towers, a ministerial adviser in the UK sent an email saying, "it's now a very good day to get out anything we want to bury".  She saw a crisis as an opportunity. So, it appears to be seen in Beijing.  With the world focused on a pandemic that started in China, now is the moment chosen by the Chinese leadership to introduce a security law.  Pro-democracy activists in Hong Kong fear it could be the death of their beloved territory.  Dennis Kwok is a Civic Party politician and warned that if the law comes into force "one country, two systems will officially be erased. This is the end of Hong Kong".  During last year's sometimes violent protests, the constant question was 'what is Beijing going to do?' Now we know.  During the turmoil, there was surprise among some that the authorities in China did not directly intervene, even though it had troops stationed in the territory and it appeared Chinese soldiers and equipment were being massed on the border.  Perhaps the explanation was the global reaction to the bloody crushing of the Tiananmen Square protests in 1989.  In Australia, a sobbing prime minister Bob Hawke condemned the massacre and allowed Chinese students in our country to remain here.  The Chinese Government took years to move on from being seen as a pariah state.  Ironically the very virus that has drawn the world's attention provides a handy diversion from the country where it all started.  Not that the proposed new law is going totally unnoticed.  President Trump has threatened to react but has not said what he has in mind. Even a few months ago the Chinese might have been more cautious and fearful of a negative reaction, especially from the US. But with Donald Trump recently in full anti-Chinese flight, there is not so much to lose anymore. The trade wars between the US and China have been eclipsed by the US President's condemnation of Beijing for its handling of COVID-19.  If it's China's fault, therefore responsibility for the world's worst death toll can't be his.  Trump's China tirades appear central to his re-election strategy.  He blames America's horrible death toll and its damaged economy on a nation that, for now, feels less inclined to worry about Washington's opinions.  And it would have been surprising if the Chinese leadership had not developed a strategy to counter the pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong.  Add to that the muscular promotion of expansionist nationalism under Xi Jinping and the stage is again set for more trouble ahead, and not just in Hong Kong.  The Taiwanese leadership will be watching with alarm. Imposing new laws is just the first step. The question then is enforcement.  The very existence of sedition legislation may act as a brake on some protesters who fear they could be jailed for years on orders from Beijing.  But it would be naive to underestimate the determination of many in Hong Kong who have previously spent months battling in the streets against what they see as Beijing's creeping authoritarianism in the territory.  If, as expected, the laws are approved, then we will hear diplomatic protests from the US, Britain, and possibly, Australia and others.  But with the world focused on COVID-19, it probably won't unduly worry the Chinese leadership.  The vague threat of action by Trump may have consequences, but the President's promises are not always followed by action. From the Chinese Government's point of view Hong Kong is a problem to be managed. And this law, it appears, is the mechanism.  Xi Jinping will not lose sleep worrying about the erosion of democratic freedoms enshrined in the 50-year agreement signed with Britain 23 years ago But do not expect Hong Kongers to simply take it. The streets will most likely again become battlefields.  Despite the new threats of arrest and prosecution, many who maintained the rage last year will feel even more strongly there is nothing left to lose. It feels like a collision is inevitable. How, where and when is impossible to know. But clearly the Chinese leadership is feeling strong enough to risk whatever lies ahead. 
Violet Town farmers find global success during coronavirus pandemic
An online food network platform developed in Violet Town has taken off across the world as producers look for alternative ways to sell produce. Serenity Hill and Kirsten Larsen, cofounders of the Open Food Network, launched the not-for-profit platform in 2012 after noticing a gap in the market. "We realised supply chains were a critical problem," Ms Larsen said. "There was a disconnect between farmers doing great sustainable farming and the customers that wanted it." Ms Larsen said the platform connected farmers with their communities and put the power of buying and selling back into the hands of the consumer and producer. "We wanted to get more of the retail dollar in farmers pockets and support more sustainable food," she said. The platform acts as a directory where anyone can create a profile and be located through a simple search on a map. Producers can also create their own shop where they can collect payment and sell produce. "It's particularly designed to support the different distribution systems," Ms Larsen said. "Producers can set up a bunch of different shipping methods such as drop-off to people's houses, have a collection point, or pick-up from farms." What started as a grass roots initiative now spans 13 countries, among them Brazil, the Philippines and Italy. Ms Hill said the first global affiliates  and the biggest  were the UK and France. "Canada and the US have also come along and joined the global collective," she said. Subscribe to Rural RoundUp: Stories from the farm. More farmers got on board when the pandemic hit and supply chains began to shut down, along with many farmers' markets, restaurants and cafes. Ms Hill said producers had to start searching for alternative ways to sell their products, leading to a major expansion of the platform. "COVID-19 really was the catalyst," she said. "We had a tenfold increase in people signing up for the platform and a tenfold increase in turn over through the platform." Ms Larsen said it was critical to get the framework right . "It's not about us doing it," she said. "It's about how we create a space so people can see the possibilities and get onboard to make it happen for themselves." 
China doesn't set GDP target, promises more than $400b to prop up coronavirus-hit economy
China's Government has announced close to $430 billion worth of stimulus funding to help the world's second-largest economy remain stable. The battle against the coronavirus "has not yet come to an end," Premier Li Keqiang warned in a report to the National People's Congress of China. He called on the country to "redouble our efforts" to revive the struggling economy, and said Beijing would skip setting a growth target in order to focus on fighting the disease.  The world's second-largest economy contracted by 6.8 per cent in the three months ending in March after factories, offices, travel and other businesses were shut down to fight the virus.  Mr Li said Beijing would give local governments 2 trillion yuan ($429 billion) to spend on preventing job losses, making sure the public's basic needs were met and helping private companies survive. China, where the pandemic began in December, was the first economy to reopen but is struggling to revive activity.  Private sector analysts say as many as 30 per cent of the country's 442 million urban workers  or as many as 130 million people  lost jobs at least temporarily when the economy shut down to fight the virus, and as many as 25 million jobs might be lost for good this year.  The Government's budget deficit will swell by 1 trillion yuan ($214 billion) this year to help meet targets including creating 9 million new urban jobs, Mr Li said.  "These are extraordinary measures for an unusual time," he said in his nationally televised speech. Read more about coronavirus:A breakdown of which restrictions will be eased across Australia this weekAnatomy of an outbreak: How the Ruby Princess nightmare unfolded Mr Li said the ruling Communist Party would not set a GDP target, usually a closely watched feature of government plans, due to the "great uncertainty" of the epidemic. Factories and shops have reopened but consumer spending, the main engine of economic growth, is weak. Forecasters say China is likely to face a wave of politically volatile job losses later in the year due to weak US and European demand for Chinese exports. Mr Li warned that ensuring economic growth was "of crucial significance" and said pressure on employment had "risen significantly." The announcement comes as trade tensions between China and Australia continue to be strained.  China's top diplomat in Western Australia, Consul General Dong Zhihua, returned to Shanghai this week after the country implemented tariffs on Australian barley.   Australia's barley exports to China were worth $600 million in 2019, and there are fears the new tariffs could decimate the industry. Western Australia will suffer the most, with 88 per cent of Australia's barley exports coming from the state.  ABC/AP 
Home schooling during coronavirus overwhelmed many parents. Why your best was 'good enough'
Parents grappling with helping their children learn remotely during the coronavirus pandemic might breathe a little easier knowing the situation almost sent one of the country's most loved educators "berserk".  Children's author Mem Fox said it only took two days of trying to teach her grandchild maths to push her to the edge. Fox worked as an educator for decades but said it did little to prepare her for the frustration of teaching a primary school student how to multiply. "The methods of teaching have changed  we weren't taught the techniques they're using now so I was trying to learn while teaching and it made me feel like weeping with ineptitude," she said. Students in NSW and Queensland will head back to school full-time from Monday, ending eight weeks of remote learning for all children except those with parents who work in essential services. At the height of the coronavirus pandemic, school attendance rates were roughly 10 per cent in NSW. In Victoria, students in prep, Year 1, Year 2, Year 11 and Year 12 will return to school on Tuesday, May 26, and those from Year 3 to Year 10 are expected to return on June 9. WA students have already returned, after being ordered back into classrooms on May 18. A survey of 10,000 teachers found only 35 per cent of teachers felt students had adequate resources at home  including having a freely available adult on hand to assist, along with technology or even a desk. While the time spent at home varied from state to state, anecdotal evidence suggests many parents felt overwhelmed with their newfound responsibilities. Pasi Sahlberg, from the Gonski Institute at the University of NSW, assured parents that learning comes in many forms. "The cold fact is most of the information they're taught at school they forget anyway," he said. "If you did your best that's good enough." Professor Sahlberg, who is a renowned international education expert, said students' emotional wellbeing will be more important than their cognitive learning over the next few months. "They're probably not showing it but coping with the pandemic means there's a lot going through their little minds," he said. He said making sure children felt happy and safe was more important than catching up on missed lessons. Ms Fox wants parents and grandparents feeling inadequate to know their attempts at remote learning, were unlikely to have a lasting impact. "I think kids can go off for six months on a boat trip and come back and be fine," she said. The author said she "nearly went berserk" trying to home school her grandchildren and had a simple message for anyone who thinks parents did not need to become teachers during the pandemic. "That's absolutely crap," she said. "You can't be at home with your kids without taking on the teacher role  that's a contradiction in terms." "You had to guide, explain, unpick problems, encourage, challenge, be kind, be strict  everything a teacher had to do  without a four-year degree to prepare them." 
Queensland trio terminate Australian rugby contracts amid pay dispute during coronavirus shutdown
Three Queensland Reds players, including Wallabies lock Izack Rodda, have ended a stand-off with Rugby Australia (RA) by terminating their contracts. Rodda, along with Reds teammates Harry Hockings and Isaac Lucas, had refused to take short-term pay cuts of an average 60 per cent that their Australian Super Rugby counterparts accepted following the suspension of the competition because of the coronavirus pandemic. This move prompted the Reds to stand down the three players ahead of last Monday's return to training. The players' agent, Anthony Picone, argued the Reds had no legal grounds to do so and this morning he confirmed the termination of their RA and Queensland Rugby Union (QRU) contracts. "It is disappointing the QRU chose to air the issues publicly," Picone said in a statement. "Given the parlous state of rugby in Australia and Queensland we offered the organisation the opportunity to deal with these matters in private and confidentially. This offer was rejected." The trio were the only players of the 192 Australian Super Rugby professionals to baulk at the salary hits that will be revised once a schedule and broadcast deal is finalised for the truncated competition due to begin in July. Rodda, who has played 25 Tests for the Wallabies, was reportedly at odds with Reds coach Brad Thorn and seeking a move to a rival Australian team. Hockings, a lock who is regarded as one of the rising stars of Australian rugby, and fly half Lucas were believed to be assessing their options overseas. Rodda and Lucas were both contracted until 2023, while Hockings was off contract at the end of this season. "This is their livelihood. It is only reasonable that talented players want to secure stable employment during these times," Picone said. Picone has long ruffled feathers at the Reds. He arranged a move to Japan for former Reds captain Samu Kerevi last year, while he also facilitated the exits of Wallabies players Will Genia and Liam Gill. RA and QRU are yet to comment on the decision made by the three players. The development comes after RA made changes to its leadership team in recent weeks, as it struggles to meet the financial challenges caused by the coronavirus shutdown. Hamish McLennan was announced as its new chairman last week, while Rob Clarke was appointed interim chief executive earlier this month. Clarke replaced Raelene Castle, who stood down as chief executive in April. AAP 
Winter woollies arrive just in time for Indigenous community in coronavirus lockdown
Donations of warm clothing have been distributed to locked-down residents at a central Queensland Indigenous community just ahead of an expected cold snap. The eased restrictions were cancelled after a confirmed case of COVID-19 in Rockhampton, so the community has relied on donations of warm clothing Woorabinda has been in lockdown for two months and last week the community voted to ease restrictions enough to allow residents to do essential shopping in Rockhampton over the following two Saturdays. This was cancelled after a nurse in Rockhampton was diagnosed with COVID-19, so the community put out a call for donations  and it was answered. Warm clothes, blankets, towels and shoes were delivered this week and the Red Cross coordinated distribution to the community just in time for overnight temperatures falling as low as two degrees in some parts of central Queensland this weekend. Red Cross service manager Rhonda Hill said the arrival of winter woollies was a highlight in a challenging time.  "People are still in good spirits, but it was a little disheartening, especially after the community vote, and we were going to get out and get the winter clothes," said Ms Hill. "It is what it is, and we understand and accept it.  "It's about our safety, especially our elders." Tight restrictions under the Federal Biosecurity Act mean any resident who leaves must quarantine for 14 days before returning.  Woorabinda Aboriginal Shire Council negotiated two 12-hour windows for essential shopping with the local disaster management group before the COVID-19 case in Rockhampton. It will review the situation next week.  Since the lockdown, a transfer station at the entrance to Woorabinda is a link to the outside world where supplies are left twice a week. It also gives families an opportunity to see each other. "It's quite hard for grandparents to see grandchildren  they just want to hug but they can't do that because we've got to respect the 1.5 metre distance," Ms Hill said. "But seeing them has given us an opportunity to have that peace of mind." The Red Cross and other organisations in Woorabinda collect goods delivered to the station, sanitise them and organise collection by the family. "This brings such a relief to families and it's well received by the community," Ms Hill said. 
NSW coronavirus restrictions relaxed for restaurants, pubs and cafes, Premier Gladys Berejiklian reveals
Premier Gladys Berejiklian says pubs, cafes and restaurants will be able to serve up to 50 people at a time from June 1, as NSW coronavirus cases continue to decline. The Premier described expanding the social-distancing limits as a "big step" in the state's economic recovery from COVID-19. Under the new measures, hospitality venues will be required to adhere to strict guidelines to operate: Since last Friday, pubs, restaurants and cafes have been able to serve a maximum of 10 patrons at a time in NSW. But the new, more relaxed restrictions, mean Australia's worst-affected coronavirus state will soon have the nation's most relaxed social-distancing laws, bar the Northern Territory. Health Minister Brad Hazzard said NSW was leading the national fight against the virus. "It's time to get out, time to enjoy yourself, but also it's time to be very, very cautious, because the virus is still amongst us," he said. Mr Hazzard said people going to restaurants should be "washing your hands like you've never done before". The Premier will not direct police to count the number of patrons at each location. Her Government is still working with the hospitality industry to "fine-tune" the new regulations. She said any venue found in breach would be closed down. One idea, suggested by Mr Hazzard, was for all patrons at a venue to provide their name and phone number on entry, to make contact tracing infections easier. NSW Treasurer Dominic Perrottet said there were 280,000 people who applied JobKeeper nationally who worked in the hospitality sector. He said cafes, restaurants and pubs would be central to the state's economic recovery from the virus, and opening them would ensure that when the JobKeeper program ends, people would have paid work. Deputy Premier John Barilaro said the increased cap would be a boon for regional businesses, which were struggling amid the coronavirus lockdown. The changes to restaurant rules will coincide with the same deadline that regional travel will be eased in NSW. "We've opened up the regions and now it's our happy hour, time to wine and dine," Mr Barilaro said. Mr Hazzard said Australia was leading the world in the fight against the virus. "And NSW is leading Australia yet again," he said. 
FGM spikes in Somalia due to coronavirus lockdown but there's a 'worrying' silence in Australia
Women's rights groups fear lockdowns to stem the spread of COVID-19 will see a spike in cases of female genital mutilation (FGM) worldwide, with Australian activists concerned the practice could be on the rise behind closed doors. In Somalia, aid groups have seen an "alarming spike" in demand for FGM services as cutters are going door-to-door during coronavirus lockdowns and school closures, Plan International Australia has warned. The United Nations Population Fund, meanwhile, recently predicted some 2 million extra cases of FGM and 13 million additional child marriages would occur over the next decade due to COVID-19. But in Australia, it's the relative silence that has anti-FGM campaigners worried. WARNING: This story contains graphic descriptions which may disturb some readers. FGM, sometimes called female circumcision, is the partial or total cutting of the clitoris and other external genitalia and in Somalia, the vaginal opening is often sewn up  a procedure called infibulation, the most severe form of FGM. FGM has no health benefits and can leave girls with infections, bleeding, chronic pain and psychological injuries. The procedure can result in death. Sadia Allin said she was alarmed when a woman knocked on her door and offered to cut her daughters, aged just five and nine. Ms Allin, Plan International's head of mission in Somalia, was subjected to genital mutilation when she was a child and is determined that her daughters will not undergo it. "I was shocked," she said. "What was really scary is  my girls are safe with me from FGM  but I was so scared for the girls next door." She said healthcare workers across the country and nurses they partner with reported a spike in requests for FGM to be carried out while daughters were home from school. "Most disturbingly, we have seen an increase in FGM incidents across the country," she said. "The restrictive impact of COVID-19 has forced girls out of school and that has increased their vulnerability to forms of violence in their homes, including FGM." Bring your daughter to "mass circumcision" for $10, a Facebook advertisement in Indonesia's South Sulawesi province reads. In rural areas, female genital mutilation is still in high demand. Ms Allin said FGM is often seen as an essential part of womanhood and a precondition for marriage in Somalia. Somalia's constitution states that the circumcision of girls is "tantamount to torture" and is prohibited, but the country does not have a law against FGM. As coronavirus spreads around the globe, health experts and aid groups fear some of the world's most vulnerable countries in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and the Pacific could become new hotspots for COVID-19. Ms Allin said what was concerning was that some cutters who had given up FGM had now resumed the harmful practice due to the economic crisis spurred by the lockdown. "We are losing the gains we made," she said. "You might say the number [of girls subjected to FGM] in Somalia was already 98 per cent, so what's the difference? The reason for the alarm is the very short period of time. "It has to do with gender inequality  [it sends the message] that girls don't have the right to own their own body. And it impacts everything, from education [to] their ambition for leadership." The African continent has over 95,000 cases of coronavirus and nearly 3,000 deaths, according to the African Centres for Disease Control. In Somalia, there are just over 1,500 cases and 61 deaths, according to the Johns Hopkins University COVID-19 map. African-Australian activist Khadija Gbla said she usually gets half a dozen calls each month from concerned teachers, social workers, or girls themselves at risk of FGM here. But in the past couple of months, she's not had a single one  and "that is the most dangerous thing," she told the ABC. "Nothing. It's been crickets, complete crickets, that is the worrisome part of it," Ms Gbla said. "Kids are stuck at home with parents and can't actually reach for help. The problem is that we won't actually see the damage until this is all over, and then we're going to have a whole range of children who have been cut or mutilated. "The restrictions in place have created a breeding ground for this to take place." A new documentary starts a conversation about the widespread and unregulated practice of female circumcision in Malaysia. In Australia, an estimated 53,000 women have undergone FGM but Ms Gbla said there are 11 girls "at risk" of FGM in Australia each day.  FGM is illegal in Australia and there have been three successful prosecutions against the practice in recent years. Ms Gbla said while trips overseas to countries where FGM is commonplace have stopped due to global travel bans, that was not much comfort for her foundation, The Desert Flower Centre, which is aware of individuals in Australia who will perform FGM for a little as $1,000 or $2,000. "What we know is that people have always found ways around travel and they have found people in Australia who are willing to do it," she said. Olayide Ogunsiji, a senior lecturer at the Western Sydney University school of nursing and midwifery, said she had not heard of any rise in FGM cases here, but was concerned that could be due to a lack of reporting.  Dr Ounsiji feared lockdowns would enable parents to pressure their daughters into undergoing FGM, adding she was concerned about the broader impact of the pandemic on sexual and reproductive health in Australia's migrant and refugee communities. "It's about raising more awareness in this particular time of lockdown that there will be many girls and women that will be trapped into giving their consent to have it done," she said.  The projected global increase, she said, was "shocking, but not surprising".  "The reason I say it's not surprising is because of the closed-door secrecy that surrounds the practice itself," she said.  Khadija Gbla's repressed memory of female genital mutilation would surface during puberty. Being an outsider to a 'clitero-centric' culture, was a decision made for her. Ms Gbla added that seeking help for women abroad at this time was made more difficult due to shutdowns, citing a case where a woman in Turkey had reached out to her  the woman had been subjected to FGM and the mutilation had made urinating and menstruating unbearably painful. That was three weeks ago and Ms Gbla said she has been unable to connect with medical services on the ground there. "There's always been a silence around it, given it's such a cultural practice, and then you add COVID-19 into the mix, so kids are not having access to services  shelter and support," she said. "We are sitting ducks with our hands tied, waiting to deal with the carnage post-COVID, when the restrictions are lifted. Because we will have a carnage on our hands." The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women Marise Payne has been approached for comment. 
Former White House butler Wilson Roosevelt Jerman, who served 11 US presidents over 55 years, dies from coronavirus
A former White House butler who served 11 US presidents over more than five decades has died at the age of 91 from coronavirus. Wilson Roosevelt Jerman succumbed to COVID-19, prompting glowing tributes from former first families. More than 95,000 Americans have died from coronavirus since February, with more than 1.61 million confirmed cases across the US. Mr Jerman's career began in 1957 with the Dwight Eisenhower administration and ended under Barack Obama in 2012. He performed a variety of roles during 55 years at the White House, including cleaner, lift operator, butler and maitre d'. "With his kindness and care, Wilson Jerman helped make the White House a home for decades of first families, including ours," said former first lady Michelle Obama.  "His service to others  his willingness to go above and beyond for the country he loved and all those whose lives he touched  is a legacy worthy of his generous spirit." Mr Jerman was promoted from cleaner to butler during the presidency of John Kennedy when first lady Jackie Kennedy noticed his professionalism. "[Jackie Kennedy] was instrumental in ensuring that that happened," his granddaughter Jamila Garrett told Fox 5 in Washington. Former president George W Bush and first lady Laura Bush said that Mr Jerman was a "lovely man." "He was the first person we saw in the morning when we left the residence and the last person we saw each night when we returned," the Bushes said in a statement. Hillary Clinton remembered Mr Jerman as a White House employee who added a human touch to his daily duties. "Bill and I were saddened to hear of the passing of Wilson Roosevelt Jerman at the age of 91 from COVID-19," she tweeted. "Jerman served as a White House butler across 11 presidencies and made generations of first families feel at home, including ours." During more than half a century in the White House, Mr Jerman witnessed many changes in US race relations, culminating in Mr Obama becoming the first black president in 2008. Ohio State University's Koritha Mitchell, author of From Slave Cabins to the White House, said that Mr Jerman was seen as an important figure in the history of African Americans in US political life. "That must have felt like a victory," Ms Mitchell said of Mr Jerman's time in the Obama White House. When he left his position in 2012 at the age of 83, Mr Jerman was honoured by Mr Obama with a series of plaques, for each of the 11 presidents he had served. When Mr Jerman began his White House career in 1957, the first frisbee had just been sold in US stores, Robert Menzies was Australian Prime Minister and the Asian Flu pandemic was claiming over 150,000 lives worldwide. ABC/Wires 
What happens behind the scenes producing the ABC Coronavirus Australia live news blog
During a frantic shift curating rapidly unfolding news on the coronavirus crisis, sourcing information for inquiring readers and dishing up some occasional light relief with an amusing GIF, ABC News blogger Sophie Meixner came across a particularly curly question. Barbara wanted to know if she could continue to employ her 'gorgeous pool boy'? "We get a lot of questions asking: 'Can I do [specific activity] in [specific state or territory]' but I wasn't expecting Barbara's particular conundrum," recalls Sophie Meixner. "I saw the comment come in and read it out loud to Simon Smale, who was blogging with me. "We both chuckled, I threw it in the blog along with a couple of lines and didn't think anything of it. "A few people posted the screenshot on Twitter and it escalated from there. "I give all credit to Barbara who asked the most perfect and hilarious question that I only supplemented with my response." While Meixner's deft handling brought some laughs (as well as clarifying whether tradespeople were allowed to visit homes) she and her fellow bloggers take great care to ensure they're striking the right tone, given the devastating scale and impact of COVID-19. "First and foremost, the vast majority of the blog is for posting breaking news and making the current situation clearer for our audience  though we do try to write it in a more conversational and accessible way than some other news stories," Meixner says. "With the more flippant parts of the coronavirus blog, like 'feuds' between bloggers, occasional GIFs, and funny audience questions, I have certainly grappled with making sure I don't ever lose sense of the gravity of the situation and the fact that many people are deeply affected. "That said, the clear majority of our commenters indicate to us that we are striking the right balance between news coverage and the occasional moment of levity, reminding them there can still be humour and silliness in the world." Live blogs are usually launched around big breaking news events to provide rolling coverage of an unfolding story and compliment more traditional news articles, explainers and analysis, but they've also been an important part of ABC News coverage of elections, sport and big entertainment events, such as the Oscars and Eurovision. "Blogging allows us to get the key points to the audience as things happen, in real time," says Simon Smale. "I've been involved in blogging the summer bushfires, Queensland floods and the Christchurch massacre. "It's obvious that those events require a very different style of blogging, where we deliver concise, clear information in a sensitive way. "Meanwhile, when I've been covering Test cricket with the sport team, the coverage tends to be much more frivolous, with GIFS, jokes and a really large amount of audience interaction. "With the coronavirus blog, I've found that the tone that works best is somewhere between the two, a happy medium between delivering the news and keeping things entertaining." The audience interaction in a blog also helps inform how a story or news event is covered. "The added bonus of a live blog is that it gives us an opportunity to see what people are asking about that topic in real time and, particularly during coronavirus, gives us an opportunity to help people find out information," Smale says. "We're able to have those two-way discussions with readers and, to an extent, let them drive the coverage." "Blog readers are necessarily very switched on to the news because they are already across the broad picture and are coming to the blog for minute-by-minute updates," Meixner says. "In that way they often give us insightful and very funny commentary, as well as ask really challenging questions that are well-informed by context and often that nobody else has considered. "So, audience interaction truly enhances the quality of the blog. "There are two moments that stand out to me. "The first was on March 13 when the Government raised the SmartTraveller alert for the whole world to a Level 3 'do not travel'. "The second was on March 29 when Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced the 10-person gathering rule was being cut to a two-person rule. "Both of those moments felt so surreal for me and it was the questions to the blog that made me realise exactly how much each announcement would impact on people's daily lives. "We were able to form a list of common audience questions and seek answers both for blog posts and future stories and in that way, the audience interaction on the blog really shaped our coverage." The coronavirus blog is one of ABC News's longest-running live blogs, clocking up 70 days in a row (at time of writing) since March 14 and sometimes open from 5am to past midnight on a day with lots of developments. There are often two bloggers rostered on at the same time  one focused on breaking news while the other answers audience questions. "It's always a bit of a juggling act with the blog," Meixner says. "If it's a day when the National Cabinet is due to meet we know ahead of time that it's going to be a big one  not only for breaking news, but also in the hours following the press conference when people are going to be looking to the website for an explanation of the announcements made and how they will affect their lives. "But then some days we expect it's going to be quieter and then something huge happens nationally or internationally. "The resources I'm constantly monitoring throughout the shift  aside from questions coming into the blog  are the international and Australian wire services, Twitter and email, the Just In feed on the ABC News website, the ABC News Channel on TV and a service that transcribes it called Tveeder, a constantly updated domestic stats list we use internally, and each state or territory's health website and social media feeds. "From there, information just comes at us and it's our job to present it in a prioritised and coherent way." The bloggers regularly receive more than 300 questions per shift  on the busiest days when wide-ranging restrictions were announced the number topped 1,000  and do their best to answer as many as possible. "Another funny question I had was a woman who asked whether social distancing restrictions allowed her to still have sex," Meixner says. "I answered it in a way I thought was reasonable and in line with government advice (so far as it had been given). "As a 20-something, I had a lot of friends message me after that post saying they were wondering the exact same thing. "It highlighted how surreal this entire situation is and how many aspects of life have been affected." Meixner said some distressing questions and comments have stayed with her, often from people kept apart from loved ones. "A boyfriend and girlfriend who desperately wanted to see each other but don't live together and decided to stay apart for the noble sake of flattening the curve," she said. "A grandma who is used to seeing her grandkids multiple times a week and now hasn't seen them for more than a month. "A woman struggling with her mental health who's not able to drive interstate to stay with her sister, who wants to care for her." As well as asking questions about the pandemic, the audience has become curious about the bloggers themselves and possible tension in the ranks! "In the early days of this blogging marathon, a few audience members speculated that there might be rivalries on the blog, or a so-called blogging beef," Smale says. "We got so many questions asking why Bridget (Judd) and I didn't get on (we do  I think!) or who each blogger had an issue with. "The great thing about this blog is that there have been about eight different people running it, all with different personalities and styles, which really come out over the course of a seven-and-a-half-hour shift. "I think the audience appreciates that we have different styles  and they clearly have their favourites (Bridget and Sophie being the two people we get asked about a lot). "The interaction we do get with the audience is overwhelmingly positive. "People often just leave a comment saying hi or good morning (or to ask where Sophie or Bridget are) as well as questions about what's going on in the office. "I really enjoy getting comments that I can reply to in a funny way, particularly if people have picked up a thread from a previous day." Some regular commenters even say they don't know where they'll get their fix of drama once the blog stops, and with it the blogging beef. "I hate to spoil people's blogging enjoyment but none of us are feuding with each other and in fact we work in a fairly uneventful, harmonious office," Meixner says. "But on the blog, we have fallen into these fictional alliances which are just too entertaining not to continue. "According to the blog canon, Simon and Bridget are in an active feud, and Peter (Marsh) and I also have beef." And while the audience familiarity has made for engaging and entertaining reading it's been a weird experience for the bloggers. "It's truly odd and often very flattering," Meixner says. "There are people who comment under the name #1 Sophie Fan or Team Sophie. "The blog readers are avid and intelligent news consumers whose insights I really respect. "We online journos definitely aren't like the personalities you sometimes encounter on TV and radio, we're more bookish and less extroverted. "I'm quite happy to go back to being a more-or-less-faceless ABC reporter after this." While the blog style mightn't be everyone's cup of tea, it's attracted a strong audience with more than 42 million page views.  Helping people make sense of a difficult, stressful and uncertain time  and sometimes putting a smile on their face  has been hugely rewarding for the bloggers. "One thing I enjoy most is answering a question for someone who is clearly confused, or just plain concerned about a particular topic, and being able to point them in the direction of an article that one of our journalists has written on that topic," Smale says. "When the person gets back to you and says how helpful that was, that's a good feeling." "Blogging doesn't work for everyone, but it has worked for a lot of people during the coronavirus pandemic," Meixner says. "It certainly doesn't replace the more traditional forms of journalism, which I also love doing, but simply enhances them. "It's a platform we are constantly refining, but I believe it has provided information, clarity and even hope to many Australians as we all go through this surreal event together." Read more stories about how we produce the news on ABC Backstory. 
Amidst coronavirus chaos, Donald Trump wages war on US Government watchdogs
The US President claims he's been taking a controversial, unproven, potentially dangerous drug in an attempt to ward off the coronavirus. The President threatens to "hold up" federal funding for a state that's suffering a massive flood, all because it sent out applications for mail-in voting to reduce exposure to coronavirus. The President calls a Chinese Government spokesman a "dope" and a "wacko" at a time of near unprecedented tensions between the world's two superpowers. The President's son posts an Instagram meme that suggests Donald Trump's political opponent is a paedophile. A week is a long time for a reporter covering the Trump administration. Distractions and outrage are the only constants, even (or especially) during a pandemic. But here's a thing that may have slipped your attention: Trump has purged five internal watchdogs in the space of six weeks. It's hard to think of a time in living memory when independent oversight was more important for America. Impropriety and incompetence are everywhere you look. The Trump administration and state governors are under intense scrutiny over their failure to act swiftly and effectively during the crucial early stages of the pandemic, which modelling suggests cost at least 36,000 lives. To cope with the economic collapse, the Federal Government has already borrowed $US3 trillion ($4.5 trillion) from the nation's children and grandchildren, with more eye-popping stimulus on the way. And already there have been problems. At least $US1.5 billion, intended to help small businesses struggling with the coronavirus, was snaffled up by publicly listed companies, which were given preferential treatment to apply by banks which collected larger processing fees as a result. And then there's the seizure of Republican Senate intelligence committee chair Richard Burr's phone in an FBI investigation into his dumping of $US1.7 million worth of stocks before the markets tumbled. Fury over a $US700 billion taxpayer bailout for "too-big-to-fail" companies after the 2008 financial crisis, which funded lavish bonuses for bankers and traders, helped spawn the Tea Party movement, which in part led to Trump's election. Who knows where this latest, much bigger, round of murky stimulus will lead in the years to come. Right now, we don't even have a good mechanism for understanding whether fraud is being committed on a grand scale. As part of the latest stimulus legislation, an oversight board was established with broad scope to sniff out "fraud, waste, abuse and mismanagement". Named the Pandemic Response Accountability Committee (PRAC), its membership includes inspectors-general, who were tasked with alerting the public about anything improper in the public health and economic response to the crisis. In the past few weeks, three of the committee's watchdogs have been fired: Mitch Behm from the Transportation Department, Christi Grimm of the Department of Health and Human Services and the Pentagon's Glenn Fine. Behm was investigating a possible conflict of interest; Grimm had reported severe shortages of medical supplies in hospitals; Fine was heading the group overseeing the massive stimulus package. Trump claimed he had to act after receiving "reports of bias". "We have a lot of IGs from the Obama era," he said on Tuesday. Former Justice Department inspector-general Michael Bromwich told Reuters it was akin to "a reign of terror" unleashed on the IG community at a time when they're more needed than ever. "That is bad for everyone, but it's worse for the public," he said. And yet, the sacking of these three inspectors-general are not even the most controversial. State Department inspector-general Steve Linick had been investigating several matters involving the department head, Mike Pompeo. The Secretary of State had been accused of misusing taxpayer-funded staff by directing them to pick up his dry-cleaning and walk the family dog, Sherman. It's a relatively trivial, but potentially embarrassing, allegation. But Linick was also looking into a much more serious matter: whether the Trump administration had unlawfully declared an "emergency" last year that enabled Pompeo to bypass a congressional ban on selling weapons to Saudi Arabia. The declaration was made in the aftermath of the murder of journalist Jamal Khashoggi at a time when Riyadh was dropping American bombs on Yemen, contributing greatly to the world's worst humanitarian crisis. Trump claimed he'd never even heard of the inspector-general. So why did he sack him? "I was asked to by the State Department, by Mike [Pompeo]," he said when pressed this week. The Secretary of State, under investigation on several fronts, simply asked the President to sack the man leading the inquiries and it was done. Pompeo has said he didn't know he was under investigation, claiming Linick had to go because he wasn't "performing a function" that was "additive" to the state department. Others claim it was because of unauthorised disclosures, or leaks. The fact that the fifth sacking, a few weeks ago, surprised no-one, doesn't make it any less disturbing. Michael Atkinson was the intelligence community inspector-general who lit the spark that ended in the President's impeachment and ultimate acquittal in the Senate. Atkinson was just carrying out his duty, as the law required, to report the Ukraine whistleblower complaint to congress. Trump saw it as unacceptable disloyalty. Only one Republican has spoken out strongly against the President's purge. He's the same sole Republican who voted in favour of impeaching Trump. "The firings of multiple inspectors-general is unprecedented; doing so without good cause chills the independence essential to their purpose," wrote senator Mitt Romney on Twitter. "It is a threat to accountable democracy and a fissure in the constitutional balance of power." The President has every right to remove an inspector-general for any reason whatsoever. No doubt, there may be some bias among the crop appointed by Barack Obama. But presidents usually grit their teeth and bear it, in the knowledge that every administration will cop criticism in the name of accountability, with voters making the final call. In 1981, president Ronald Reagan moved to fire IGs installed by his Democratic predecessor Jimmy Carter, but a political uproar forced him to rehire several of them. Obama fired one IG to great bipartisan backlash, and he never tried it again. We're so immune to the constant uproar under Trump, this "scandal" was easy to miss. But it represents yet another brutal assault on the checks and balances that have helped keep the US Government accountable to its employer: the taxpayer. There will be a time when Trump is no longer president. But his legacy is already carved in stone. It'll take a bold, scrupulous and popular president to resist copying the Trump playbook to avoid hard-edged scrutiny. 
Coronavirus inquiry tensions leave WA farmers fearing more China tariffs after barley hit
Watching China slap an 80 per cent tariff on Australian barley this week has made West Australian farmers nervous about whether there is more trade pain to come, according to WA Farmers Federation chief executive Trevor Whittington. "Grains, wool, wine, horticulture, the seafood industry  there's a lot of talk around peak bodies and with producers over what's happened with barley and what potentially is on the horizon," he said. Mr Whittington is also the president of Wines Western Australia, an industry caught up in another Chinese trade stoush 18 months ago. "We've seen this behaviour by China before," he said. "This is probably the new norm in how China will react when it's under pressure for whatever reason, and it'll simply ignore existing trade agreements and good protocols and lean on its importers and speed up or slow down trade activity." Mr Whittington said China's barley tariff was not in the spirit of the China Australia Free Trade Agreement, which came into force in December 2015. "I think China is certainly doing itself a disservice by signing these sorts of agreements and not just with Australia, with many other countries and regions around the world and then blatantly ignoring them," he said. "So how this possibly helps China in the long term, it's only a question that they can answer. "But the [agriculture] industry will get on with it and identify other markets and spread its risk." University of Western Australia China expert Jie Chen said Australia's actions would influence whether there were more tariffs to come. "All cards are on the table," he said. "It depends on how Australia conducts itself in the next step in relation to the so-called independent inquiry into coronavirus to be led by the World Health Organisation, and how China will see Australia behave in this international investigation. "Particularly how Australia will collaborate with the United States in pursuing China in relation to the investigation. "I would say both sides have some room to manoeuvre." Dr Chen believed China's decision to impose the barley tariff amid Australia's calls for an independent inquiry into COVID-19 fit a familiar pattern of behaviour. "That China can penalise, can punish you and it can also reward you," he said. In particular, he cited China's 2010 decision to impose import controls on Norwegian salmon in apparent retribution for the Nobel Peace Prize being awarded in Oslo to the Chinese dissident, Liu Xiaobo. Eventually, diplomatic relations between the two countries thawed. Federal Agriculture Minister David Littleproud has already made it clear there would be no retaliation and Australia and China were not engaged in a "trade war". Independent WA-based China researcher Wai Ling Yeung believed China's tariff imposition had a lot to do with how it wanted its own people to see it. "The diplomats from China have been behaving in quite a strange way, I have to say, and there's a name that's been given to that called the 'wolf warrior diplomats'," she said. "Beijing is very eager to control the dialogue and rhetoric that's been going on worldwide concerning the COVID-19 [pandemic]. "From Beijing's point of view, that will have an impact on the governance of the Chinese government and also the sustainability of the Communist Party's governance as well." But Ms Yeung also believed the Federal Government's rejection of China's overtures to join its global infrastructure initiative, the Belt and Road project, was a factor. "Some of the Chinese diplomats in Australia were getting a bit nervous and stressed by the fact that even after trying very, very hard they only managed to get Victoria to promise to sign up," she said. 
Coronavirus restrictions relaxation in SA 'confusing' for many, costly for some businesses
Coronavirus restrictions in South Australia are easing from today and people are feeling more comfortable venturing out of their homes  but instead of celebrations, the changes are causing widespread confusion. Restaurants and cafes can expand their service from today to include indoor dining. While a big topic for many is when they can go to the pub for a drink, it turns out that's not an easy question to answer. Small bars  or at least those with small venue licences  will still not be able to open until June 5 either, despite many not looking that different to restaurants. The confusion has cost Adelaide city wine bar East End Cellars about $5,000, after its operators mistakenly thought it could reopen today under the easing of COVID19 restrictions. East End Cellars had brought in food supplies, printed new menus and extensively cleaned its toilets ahead of a planned relaunch. However, owner Michael Andrewartha said an early morning call from the licensing commissioner changed those plans. "The fine line is that we are a bar, even though there's no bar here or a bar licence, so we had to not open today, which is disappointing for everyone," Mr Andrewartha said. Premier Steven Marshall said the State Government wanted to limit the total number of people flocking back to eat and drink out, as well as the number or patrons in individual venues. "It is confusing and we acknowledge that," he said. "We apologise for that confusion but what we're trying to do is lift the restrictions in an orderly way and keep the coronavirus at bay." Consumer and Business Services said it would let individual venues know they could be in breach of the rules if they were "opening in the mistaken belief they are able to open". Pubs originally intended to reopen indoor dining on Monday, June 8  but health authorities have brought that forward to June 5 so hoteliers can capitalise on the Queen's Birthday long weekend trade.  That is a "common sense" decision, according to Ian Horne from the state branch of the Australian Hotels Association. "It would have been nonsense to start reforms on the last day of a long weekend, so thankfully they've recognised common sense should prevail," he said. The short answer is: we don't know yet. How things will look when pubs and licensed venues reopen on June 5 is not absolutely clear. SA Police Commissioner Grant Stevens said authorities were taking a "principled approach" to restrictions  meaning it won't be a one-size-fits-all ruling.  "Instead of having a blanket rule for every business in South Australia we'll be developing protocols that businesses will have to adopt," he said. "That will enable them to take full advantage of the economic benefits of reopening their businesses." That decision is a relief for some business owners, particularly those with larger venues.  It means that, rather than the previous ruling of only 20 patrons inside, a larger pub with multiple dining areas could be allowed to cater to more people given the bigger floorspace that will allow for social distancing to occur. Going to the pub for a sit-down meal will be allowed from June 5, but depending on the size and layout, the owners will need to consider their obligations once further details are released.  If they deem it to be viable, and they choose to open, patrons should be able to head to their local on June 5 to enjoy a meal with friends. Determining when you can go back just for a drink in the bar is more uncertain  at this stage it looks like only seated dining and drinking will be allowed. "In the first instance we're talking about seated dining within the pubs, but we'll get all of those guidelines," Mr Marshall said.  Some pub owners are disappointed with the news, particularly those who don't serve food, like the Wheatsheaf Hotel in Thebarton. "It won't be viable for us to open under those conditions," said Wheatsheaf owner Jade Flavell.  Restaurants and cafes can now serve 10 people for outdoor dining and 10 people for indoor dining, and the rules have changed to allow the service of alcohol. So, those who have been looking forward to supporting their favourite restaurants  and they've chosen to open  can go as early as today. Police will also resume stationery drug and alcohol testing this weekend. Even though mobile random breath tests have been in operation the whole time, officers are expected to be out in force.  Wallis Cinemas' drive-in cinema at Gepps Cross will reopen next Friday, June 29, but other cinemas will have to wait until June 5. Those wanting to work out at the gym will also have to wait a little longer  but can return from June 5 in some capacity. The guidelines are still being drafted, but you should be prepared to clean equipment before and after use and there may also be restrictions on the number of people allowed in at any one time, depending on the size of the facility.  People wanting to attend indoor exercise classes may also be able to go back from June 5  but, again, details on how it will work are yet to be provided. Some operators may decide it's not viable to start back up if they have to reduce class sizes by too much to allow for social distancing. June 5 is also when beauty and nail salons, massage parlours and tattoo shops can all open, but more details are expected on how many people can be inside at any one time.  You might not get an appointment straight away if the operators can only have limited people inside, and there may be a back log of customers to clear. Spas and saunas remain closed as authorities say there's a higher risk of transmission in those sorts of places. Activities that involve larger gatherings  such as going to the football or a nightclub or food court  will not be resuming any time soon. 
Victoria coronavirus cases rise by 12, including another five linked to Cedar Meats cluster
Victoria has recorded another 12 coronavirus infections, including five linked to an outbreak at the Cedar Meats abattoir. It brings the number of cases linked to the abattoir in Brooklyn, in Melbourne's west, to 111 including 67 staff and 44 close contacts. The rise in cases means Victoria has been responsible for the majority of Australia's reported cases during the past week  53 of 73 cases reported by Friday morning.  Four of the new diagnoses were detected in hotel quarantine and two through community screening programs. The other case is still under investigation. There are 93 active coronavirus cases recorded in Victoria, with 10 people in hospital, including five in intensive care units. The State Opposition said it was increasingly concerned about the growing cluster of cases linked to Cedar Meats and continued to push for an independent investigation. "This cluster gets worse and worse every day," Opposition Leader Michael O'Brien said. While Health Minister Jenny Mikakos earlier said it had been handled "absolutely perfectly", Mr O'Brien said "111 infected people tells you this has been a shambles". Education Minister James Merlino said about 10,000 school staff had been tested as the state prepares to resume face-to-face teaching on Tuesday. "I'm just so pleased that around 10,000 education staff so far have gone and got tested and not one has come back with a positive result," he said. Mr Merlino said health authorities had identified 171 infections which could indicate community transmission, an increase of three since Thursday, out of a total 1,593 positive COVID-19 cases in Victoria. Meanwhile, Victoria Police issued only eight fines to people breaching coronavirus restrictions since 11:00 pm on Sunday, after conducting 3,839 spot checks on homes, businesses and non-essential services. There are only five reasons to leave your home in Victoria  shopping for things you need, accessing medical services or caregiving, attending work or education that cannot be done from home, exercise and some recreational activities, and visiting family and friends. Up to five visitors are allowed at your home and gatherings of up to 10 are allowed outdoors in public for non-contact sport and recreation, but you must maintain 1.5 metres between yourself and others. The State Opposition has criticised the Government's decision toslowlyeaserestrictions, as other states push ahead with opening restaurants and relaxing travel rules. The Melbourne Cricket Club (MCC) has announced it will offer a 30 per cent discount for members, with the president conceding it was "unlikely" fans would be able to watch AFL matches during the 2020 season. The club has about 130,000 members and a further 215,000 on waiting lists, with annual fees for metropolitan-based adults ranging between $360 to $715. Updated Sunday, May 24 Membership grants fans automatic access to most AFL and cricket games at the MCG, as well as a seat in the members' stand. "Our revenue model is dramatically compromised as a result of the crisis and the revenue from managing the ground will not return in any significant form until crowds at games can return," MCC president Michael Happell said. The 30 per cent discount will apply to the club's upcoming 2020/21 season, which begins on September 1. Further discounts would be offered to members who could show they had suffered financial hardship, Mr Happell said. The decision comes as some AFL clubs and Adelaide Oval members have been offered full refunds on 2020 memberships, with the Australian Competition and Consumer Commissionsaying it will "monitor issues relating to sport club membership refunds, credits and ongoing charges". Speaking on ABC Radio Melbourne, MCC chief executive Stuart Fox said the reaction from members to the proposal had been "overwhelmingly positive". While many regard the club and its Members Pavillion as the posh section of the MCG, Mr Fox dismissed suggestions they were "elitist". "They're hard-working Australians, who have joined the club because they love sport," he said. "They're the same as AFL members. They're the same as sporting club members." "Anyone can join the Melbourne Cricket Club. You can put your name down at birth. We don't discriminate, it's access for all. I think it's factually incorrect to call us elitist in any way." The AFL season is set to resume on June 11, however fans will not be permitted at games for the foreseeable future. 
Australia's research ship checking Hobart air quality amid coronavirus shutdown
Tasmanian scientists are collecting data on Hobart's air quality using the CSIRO's research vessel Investigator while the ship is stuck in port due to the coronavirus restrictions. RV Investigator  which has atmospheric instruments to monitor emissions and pollutants  was forced to suspend its operations in March and cancelled five voyages out to sea. CSIRO research scientist Melita Keywood said the instruments were currently running to measure air quality in the Hobart region.  "Wherever the Investigator goes, we can make measurements of the atmosphere, measurements for particles, natural gases and greenhouse gases," she said.  "In Hobart, there are EPA stations that are measuring air quality data to make sure we have good air quality so everyone's health is protected. "There are some gases that we are measuring on the ship that are different from what are usually measured in an air quality station, like carbon dioxide." Ms Keywood said some of the data, such as the presence of gases like ozone, had not been collected in more than 20 years. "That is an air pollutant and is of concern to human health but it's not been measured since the 1990s," she said.  "From the preliminary data, the concentrations are still very low. Particles are bad for human health, but they're not just one thing.  "There are lots of different chemicals and there are lots of different sizes. So we are measuring the size of the particles and the number of small particles." CSIRO technical officer Ian McRobert said having the Investigator docked in Hobart was a unique opportunity.  "The information collected by our instruments tells us about the pollution levels within Hobart and when we're at sea it gives us great background data on global climate," he said.  "We're collecting data on the Hobart air quality throughout the winter and this will contribute to a national study on ultra-fine particle pollution and will also tell us about the profile of pollution created in Hobart during the winter.  Mr McRobert said the pollution within Hobart affected people's health and "there's not great information out there on what those pollution levels are". Science operations manager at the Marine National Facility Matthew Kimber said coronavirus had had a massive impact on the CSIRO and RV Investigator.  "Getting the science party, the researchers from all over the world onto the ship is a really challenging situation with the restrictions in place," he said.  "The other big issue, and as we've seen with cruise ships, is ships in general are really difficult places to manage with the coronavirus. "There's no doubt that we are really going to have to think about how we conduct operations for the foreseeable future." 
Toddler's brain tumour sparks fear patients in coronavirus quarantine won't seek help
Hours before doctors diagnosed 15-month-old Ingrid Newman with a life-threatening brain tumour, her mother agonised over whether to take the toddler to hospital. The pair had travelled from Cooktown to Cairns for medical tests when the toddler suddenly stopped walking early last month.  But when the tests were complete, they had to quarantine for two weeks under police and military guard before they could return home.  The rules apply to anyone wishing to enter Cape York under Federal Government legislation designed to protect vulnerable communities from COVID-19.  Ingrid and her mother, Belle Newman, were 10 days into their quarantine period when the toddler had a sudden violent seizure and started frothing at the mouth.  Ms Newman called a nurse straight away, but said she agonised over whether to break quarantine and send her daughter to hospital.  "I am really glad we did go because otherwise we wouldn't have known about this tumour and it could have gotten much worse," she said.  The family is now in Brisbane, where Ingrid is about to start chemotherapy at the Queensland Children's Hospital.  But the frightening experience has sparked fear other Cape York patients may delay seeking urgent medical help because they don't want to break isolation rules in place under the Biosecurity Act.  "I definitely do believe there are some people that would be putting it off and thinking it might just go away instead of getting help ... because they don't want to be stuck," Ms Newman said.  "I was very reluctant to have to start the two weeks quarantine again."  A Queensland Health spokesman said all public patients, carers and families were screened before going into quarantine to ensure they were fit and ready to complete the two weeks. "We have medical staff available from 8:00am to 10:00pm daily to respond to any medical episodes that might be suffered during quarantine," he said.  "If anyone requires any medical care they will receive it immediately." The spokesman said quarantine requirements were in place to protect First Nations communities from COVID-19.  Since the legislation passed in late March, more than 150 people have completed quarantine in government-funded accommodation in Cairns and returned to their communities on Cape York.  A further 160 are currently undergoing the process.  Ms Newman said being stuck in a hotel apartment with her toddler, unable to go outside, had been extremely difficult.  "One of the things we do to calm my daughter down when she's having a meltdown is we go outside and touch the trees," she said.  "I just couldn't do that, and of course she was being very agitated by this thing growing in her head." Other families have spoken about the mental health implications of having to quarantine in hotel apartments after childbirth. They've asked to be allowed to fly home and quarantine for two weeks when there.  A Queensland Health spokesman asked for understanding from patients and their families during "exceptional times".  "We regret any temporary and short-term inconvenience experienced by individuals and families required to comply with mandatory Commonwealth biosecurity quarantine requirements prior to returning to their Cape York or Torres Strait communities," he said.  "All people undergoing quarantine ... are accommodated in fully serviced apartments with individual kitchens and other facilities.  "They receive meals delivered to their doors three times a day and can also order additional items though reception. "They are also able to order in Uber eats, have supermarket deliveries made, or have friends and family members drop off supplies and other items for them if required.  "We recognise the concerns of patients and their families about the process, but we ask for their understanding on the need to manage their return safely and with the minimum of risk to their communities." Next week, 15-month-old Ingrid will start six weeks of chemotherapy to reduce the size of her brain tumour so that it can be removed.  Ms Newman, who's 26 weeks' pregnant with her second child, said she was grateful for the support she'd received from Queensland Health.  "In a way it was good we were in Cairns (and not Cooktown), because the help was on our doorstep," she said.  A shunt in Ingrid's head is now relieving pressure from the tumour. "It's been very overwhelming but she's such a little fighter," Ms Newman said.  "She's starting to be able to walk again and move around without any pain, and she's back to her normal, happy, cheeky self. "How she's been improving since they put the shunt in is giving us all a lot of hope." 
NSW coronavirus death toll climbs, bringing Australia's total to 101, as Government urges more testing
The NSW coronavirus death toll has climbed to 50 following the death of an 80-year-old Sydney woman, bringing Australia's total to 101. NSW chief health officer Kerry Chant said the woman died from the virus last night in Sydney's Concord Hospital. Dr Chant said the woman was exposed to the virus when she attended an outpatient clinic at the hospital but there was no ongoing risk of transmission at the facility. There were three new coronavirus infections in the state yesterday, bringing the state's total to 3,084. All three cases are still under investigation but health authorities said they were not linked and were working to determine if they had been acquired in three different areas of Sydney. A total of 8,611 people were tested for COVID-19 in the 24 hours to 8:00pm yesterday. Dr Chant said the state had a high rate of testing, with more than 400,000 people swabbed since the pandemic began. "One negative test does not mean you are not going to get COVID-19," she said. She urged people to get tested multiple times, if they felt unwell. "We are going to need you to re-engage with testing ... every time you have new respiratory symptoms, you do need another test," she said. "That's particularly important as we come through to the winter season where we might see an upswing in other respiratory infections." Dr Chant also emphasised there was no room for delays in coming forward for testing and people shouldn't take the approach of "oh I'll just see how my sore throat develops". 
Foodies begin booking out Melbourne restaurants ahead of coronavirus restrictions easing
The phones are ringing hot at popular Melbourne restaurants, pubs and cafes, as eager customers try to book the first available tables when Victoria's coronavirus restrictions ease on June 1. Hospitality venues were forced to close their doors or operate as takeaway businesses in March but, under the new rules, will be able to cater for up to 20 customers at a time. Ben Anderson, the Victorian manager of the Australian Venue Company, said all 31 of its businesses would reopen on June 1 although bookings would be limited to two-hour sessions. "People are trying to ring for groups of 10 or 20. We're getting lots of calls through our reservations line," he said. A similar rush also occurred in Sydney this month when restrictions were eased in NSW, with some restaurants reportedly booked out in an hour. Staff at the Auburn Hotel in Melbourne's inner east have been spending the week setting up equipment, furniture and glassware ahead of the long-awaited return of customers on June 1. With the venue normally popular throughout the week, manager Heather Eiswirth said calls began flooding in when the State Government flagged the reopening of restaurants on May 17. "As soon as the Government eased the restrictions we immediately got phone calls for people to book," she said. "I think everyone misses the pub environment." As stipulated by state regulations, every customer's name, contact number, and address will be recorded on a database that could be accessed by health authorities. Due to the reduced capacity, South Melbourne cafe St Ali will use black theatre curtains to artificially shrink its venue to give customers the impression that things are busy inside. Owner Salvatore Malatesta said he had received "over 100 inquiries" from people wanting to book tables. "We've got regulars who've been coming for 15 years. A dozen or slightly more come every day, seven days a week at the same time. Those guys are texting me saying 'Make sure my table is available'," Mr Malatesta said. While he was pleased to be reopening his doors, Mr Malatesta was concerned many hospitality businesses would struggle to stay afloat when the Federal Government's JopKeeper payments end in October. "I'm remaining pretty positive because the alternative is terminal," he said. "There is no other description other than to say the pandemic has decimated hospitality." The Victorian Government released some details of its plan to gradually reopen venues on May 17, and is due to announce more specifics about the rules on Monday. From June 1, up to 20 patrons will be allowed in an "enclosed space" provided venues can ensure there is enough space for one person per four square metres. The Government hopes to be able to allow up to 50 patrons from June 22, with up to 100 permitted during the second half of July. "Increased hygiene measures" for staff and patrons will also be required. Food critic and writer Dani Valent said there was also confusion in the industry about a condition that stated alcohol could only be served with a "genuine meal". Exactly what a genuine meal was  and whether it included smaller dishes like tapas, dumplings and bowls of chips  remained unclear. "It's going to be a mad scramble between May 25 and June 1 to get up to speed," she said. "It's also not clear what an enclosed space is and we don't know about outdoor areas." Ms Eiswirth agreed, and hoped the rules would allow larger venues like hers to be sectioned off into several enclosed spaces so they could operate with a higher capacity. Victoria Police will conduct checks to ensure compliance, and they will have the power to issue on-the-spot fines of up to $9,913 for breaches. The co-owner of CBD Italian restaurant Tipo 00, Andrea Papadakis, said he was "excited" to be reopening his doors on June 1, but said he would not be taking bookings for the time being. The restaurant's takeaway service would also continue when dining resumed. "We don't want to create queues," Mr Papadakis said. "I don't think it'll be as hectic as many people think. People are still happy to stay back and see what's going to happen. "We'll try to break even at the moment but it will be great for our staff. "It will open up more shifts for our staff who have been waiting at home." 
As coronavirus restrictions ease, these seniors revel in regained freedom
As COVID-19 lockdowns are gradually lifted across the nation, Australians are enthusiastically resuming many of their favourite hobbies. But for seniors, statistically considered more vulnerable to coronavirus, easing into the "new normal" comes with added risk. Five seniors spoke to the ABC about their feelings as restrictions lift, pubs fill with patrons and swimming pools reopen. At 90, Nita McAuley has been delighted to rejoin her Darwin Stingers Masters Swimming Club mates when they resumed training at the Parap Pool this week, but she could have waited longer. "I think we should have stayed locked down a bit longer and made sure that we're all well, but people get impatient. I'm not impatient, I can't afford to be," she said. Ms McAuley doesn't feel the need to limit her movement or activities but says that's only because people arriving in the NT still have to quarantine for two weeks in a hotel. "We're very lucky to be in Darwin, we haven't experienced all the terrible things that are happening down south, and I think we should keep it that way a bit longer until we're sure of what's happening in other states," she said. But other club members including Anne Walker said they would keep self-imposing limits on how many people they gathered with and how they moved about, beyond the official rules. "I won't be getting into any large groups any time soon, I am only mixing with three or four people," she said. Ms Walker also said her feeling of relative safety would disappear if the Territory's border restrictions were removed while there was still community transmission of COVID-19 in other states. On Darwin's Fannie Bay bowling green, Christine Paynter is relishing being able to gather with the members of her seniors team now the lockdown has been lifted. "I didn't like it at all because I'm a social butterfly, I like to be out and about and I've missed my bowls really badly," she said. The retired nurse said she was happy to move freely around Darwin as long as the Territory's border quarantine rules remained.  During the lockdown, she had to remain out in the community, doing essential shopping for her daughter's family, who quarantined at home for two weeks after her baby grandson came home from emergency surgery in Brisbane. "That was pretty traumatic. I just had to hand the shopping over the fence, so I also isolated myself as much as I could," she said. Larrakia elder and community leader Kathy Mills, 84, said what upset her most during the lockdown was feeling it wasn't safe to see her great-grandchildren at her home in Palmerston. "I'm very close to my grandchildren, and it has hurt me not to be with them, and then when they've come I've been nervous about touching them," she said. "It wasn't that I was scared about catching the virus, but because of my age and because I was vulnerable it made me feel worried that I might pass it on." Ms Mills hopes missing family and society has encouraged people to value those as much more important. Although she has cerebral palsy, Robyn Burridge said she hasn't felt more vulnerable than other people in the community, but she listened to medical friends who ordered her to stay at home as much as possible. She said she missed having friends to visit, as well as being able to attend a ceremony to receive an OAM for her disability sector advocacy work. But she has also found the pandemic "a great leveller". "It's been wonderful that everything has moved a lot slower, people have moved a lot slower," she said. "People avoid wheelchairs anyway, they stand away from them, so isolation wasn't a problem. Just generally I feel we've been much more easily accepted." Although she continued to shop for essentials during the lockdown, last week she made her first outing back to Darwin's foreshore in six weeks. "I didn't think freedom was so important but to just feel that lovely breeze going through your hair, and the cool crystal water, it was just absolutely beautiful," she said. She hopes that despite regaining freedom, the community will remember what it is like to move more slowly and reflect on how lucky the Territory has been to have so few virus cases. "It's not over yet, by a long shot, so we can't afford to be complacent. So I just hope that our borders stay shut for quite some time to come." 
Coronavirus restrictions could mean more risk-taking on our roads, but ACT police warn 'someone's luck will run out'
On Monday, ACT police gave a press conference expressing their frustration at Canberra's recent driving record. There had been a significant spike in road-related incidents, including one in which two drivers were caught travelling at more than 150kph on Parkes Way and another in which a 19-year-old driver wedged their car into a Kambah home at 3:00am. Three major incidents occurred on Sunday and four on Monday in the space of an hour, Officer in Charge of Road Policing, Detective Station Sergeant Marcus Boorman said. Detective Boorman said police had been seeing the rate of driving offences go up with each passing day. "We're catching people speeding, drink driving, drug driving, using their phones, and ignoring red lights on a daily basis, yet every day we're catching more people doing it," he said. He said officers were baffled by the rapid rise, considering there were far fewer drivers on the road than there were before the pandemic brought society to a halt. Detective Boorman said ACT Policing's fear was that the risk-taking behaviour would only get worse, with fines and infringements currently not having their usual effect. "I really don't know where to start in relation to our frustration with what we're seeing out there," he said. "I don't know what's causing this driver behaviour, but I do know what the effect will be, someone's luck will run out and we'll have a person, or people killed." But among psychologists, there are a few reasons that spring to mind to account for the spike in risk-taking, and they are related to the devastating ripple-effect of COVID-19. Each of us has a level of risk with which we are generally comfortable, according to ANU Professor of Psychology Michael Smithson. And when some risk in our life is mitigated, it can be a natural response to then bring in new risks to essentially level things out. That could mean going for an unusually long run and then allowing oneself to eat a special treat later as a kind of reward, effectively levelling out the relationship between risk and safety we are taking with our health. In the case of people speeding or driving under the influence, Dr Smithson said there could be a correlation with the effects of social distancing rules. "They might in a sense feel constrained, or like their freedoms have been denied in one area, so they might be compensating for that," Dr Smithson said. Early data suggesting Australians were drinking more in social isolation also fitted with that idea, he said. "People are maintaining social distancing, staying at home and so on, and when people are behaving in a more morally upright and correct fashion than they're accustomed to, that gives them license to be a little more rotten at something else," Dr Smithson said. "So they'll say, 'maybe I'll have that extra glass of wine, maybe I'll binge watch that series', and that could explain some of that risky driving." ANU College of Law Associate Professor Kath Hall said while it was not possible to know for sure why there had been a spike in driving incidents, risk-taking was often associated with heightened stress in a person's life. She said it was likely the pandemic was taking an enormous toll on people's mental health, not just in terms of uncertainty around work and other significant factors, but also in the way it had confined them. "The more that people's stress levels increase, with thoughts of their health or death, the more prone we are to respond to those stresses with drinking or drug-taking," Dr Hall said. "I think it is interesting that these driving behaviours happened straight after social distancing restrictions." In the ACT, social distancing restrictions eased overnight on Friday, allowing 10 people to dine-in at a cafe or restaurant, while liberties were also extended in relation to public spaces. Saturday night was the first evening people might have felt some license to let loose a little since the pandemic began. "There are a couple of things going on when we have less control over our life, our movements, our decisions, so that where we can, we can try to claim back some control over the things we can do," Dr Hall said. She said the pandemic  bringing with it the threat of thousands of deaths and economic turmoil  could also have altered people's perceptions of what constituted a "serious risk". Speeding or driving under the influence could actually seem like a lesser crime than it would under normal circumstances, she said. In fact, the pandemic's death toll  and subsequent reporting of those statistics  could be having the opposite effect on people than what is intended. Researchers at the University of Stirling recently reported that there was evidence people became more comfortable with taking risks after hearing reports of high numbers of deaths. "The logic is that risk-taking can be a source of self-esteem and one common way of coping with the inescapable threat of death is to bolster our self-esteem," the researchers said. "In short, when you encounter news that hundreds of people, just like your neighbours, have died in the past day, there are consequences for your judgement and decision-making. "You are unlikely to be conscious of some of these consequences and, contrary to what the media and officials would wish, they might make you sensitive to the risks that we now face." But researchers said while people were perhaps having an adverse effect to bad news around the world, stories of heroism had another impact, encouraging people to think more positively. "Heroes typically embody the traits that we would like to see continue into future generations, and so relating thoughts of death to heroism can serve as a buffer against existential concerns," they wrote. The effects of coronavirus are only just starting to be collated and investigated by science, but there is strong evidence to suggest the pandemic is already having significant impacts on our behaviour. Without the luxury of time on their side, ACT Policing could only beg the public to use common sense as coronavirus restrictions ease and society begins to enjoy certain freedoms after months of confinement. 
China's annual Congress underway after coronavirus forces two month delay
Thousands of political delegates are gathering in Beijing for China's annual parliamentary-style political Congress  in a showcase the ruling Communist Party hopes will highlight a triumph over coronavirus.  The mass gathering is being portrayed in China as a display of the country's strength in largely containing the virus domestically. It's also a chance to reset the focus on reviving the world's second largest economy. But with more than 50 cases publicly reported in the past two days despite some of the world's toughest monitoring measures, authorities here are taking many measures to minimise the risk of President Xi Jinping being exposed to the virus. At the opening of a less important advisory meeting on Thursday, nearly everyone in the Great Hall of the People wore masks. But Mr Xi and the other members of the top Politburo Standing Committee didn't wear masks. Not all of the 3,000 delegates will be attending in person. Those that are there have had to undergo hotel quarantine. Diplomats that would usually observe the opening work report by Premier Li Keqiang are only permitted in the Great Hall if they undergo COVID testing and isolation at a state guesthouse. Many are therefore not attending, including Australia's Ambassador to China Graham Fletcher. Journalists  who have long faced access barriers to those in power in China  now have an extra layer of distance. While some will be allowed in after undergoing testing, the vast majority of reporters are barred from the Congress venue and are restricted to asking (often pre-selected) questions to delegates via video link from a media centre in a different part of Beijing. "The Congress has both a symbolic and practical significance this year", said Beijing-based independent political commentator Wu Qiang. "Authorities couldn't indefinitely postpone it as they need to show they won the battle against the virus over the past few months." The biggest change is that the normal 10-day program of provincial sessions and working groups has been whittled down to about a week. While the ceremony for the opening is likely to be dialled down in an emptier hall, there are many familiar aspects about this year's event. In the lead up, the usual small army of retirees appeared on the streets clad in red armbands. The neighbourhood watch volunteers are part of a heavy-handed security effort in central Beijing each year designed to ensure nothing goes wrong. "I think Chairman Xi's good health is our biggest wish  he's our leader and guides our country", said one of the retired volunteers who declined to give his name to the ABC. "He must not fall ill." While the Congress is widely viewed outside China as a rubber stamp parliament that approves decisions largely made by the Communist Party's leadership, it does set the economic agenda for the year ahead. Usually the second-ranked leader Premier Li Keqiang would announce a GDP growth target range to signal how much China's Government will spend. Last year, it was 6-6.5 per cent. This year, with China's economy suffering an unprecedented first quarter official growth rate of minus 6.8 per cent (and some analysts suspecting it was even worse), it's not clear if he will announce a target. "I don't think Premier Li will set up a definite GDP growth target for this year. It's not necessary", said Xiang Songzuo, an economics professor. "From my observation, in the second half of this year, China's economy will have a positive growth rate, maybe 3 to 4 per cent, and overall for 2020, maybe it will be 1 per cent or 2." Some others have suggested failing to declare a growth target would hurt confidence about China's ability to bounce back quickly from the crisis. Most commentators expect the government will use fiscal and monetary tools to try to get the economy chugging again, even though options are considerably more limited now than when Beijing spent $US575 billion ($873 billion) worth of stimulus during the 2008 Global Financial Crisis. Alleviating spiralling unemployment appears to be the main focus, with few factories in China's southern manufacturing heartland running at capacity amid an export slump. "I expect Premier Li to launch more infrastructure investments", said Professor Xiang. If so, it could reassure Australian coal and iron ore exporters  who are jittery over reports that some power plants have been ordered to suspend Australian coking coal imports to protect local producers. Revised iron ore inspection procedures have also raised concerns, having been announced just days after new barley tariffs and bans on some Australian beef imports  which Chinese authorities have only half-heartedly claimed are not linked to strained diplomatic ties. A China Iron Ore Association spokesman told the ABC the new customs inspection measures were aimed at streamlining imports, not holding them up. 
No cap on commuter numbers on Queensland public transport despite coronavirus concerns over physical distancing limitations
With all Queensland students returning to the classroom on Monday, the public transport network in the state's south-east is set to face a key coronavirus physical-distancing test. In New South Wales, the State Government announced maximum numbers of passengers on buses and trains. However, Queensland Transport Minister Mark Bailey said there was currently no need to introduce capacity limits and commuters needed to use "common sense". Mr Bailey said patronage on public transport had plummeted by 77 per cent during the pandemic, and even with school returning in full, social distancing was not a problem. "There is no issue at the moment in terms of social distancing  there is a lot of space there for people," Mr Bailey said. "[Quotas] is not something that we believe is necessary at this point, and the risk in Queensland is considerably lower than New South Wales where community transmission is much more common. "We're cognisant of the fact that when schools go back fully next week there will be an increase in passengers, but again, people are not going to just go back to how they worked before." University of Queensland virologist Ian Mackay said Queensland appeared to be keeping the situation under control, and while children could be infected with COVID-19, they seemed to be affected less severely. "The experiment goes on with us returning back to normal, as much as we can, while keeping that physical distance," Associate Professor Mackay said.  Patronage levels will be monitored.(Supplied: Queensland Government) Authorities said cleaning on public transport vehicles had increased in response to coronavirus. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Passengers are not allowed to use cash to buy a ticket and bus commuters must board via the rear door. "[We're also] ensuring [passengers] are aware of how to socially distance and those communications will increase in coming days," Mr Bailey said. Transport Workers Union (TWU) Queensland branch secretary Peter Biagini said the union would also like to see some seats blocked off to help ensure physical distancing. He said safe social distancing needed to be maintained on public transport, but drivers should not have to be the ones to enforce it. "Members of the public need to pitch in to ensure that there is social distancing happening on public transport  if we all do our bit we can come out of this stronger," he said. "We have been campaigning on having screens installed for the drivers for years to stop them being assaulted and spat on  if we had these in already then our members would be much more comfortable at work during this pandemic. "We will continue to push for 10 days of special pandemic leave for any driver who has been possibly exposed to COVID-19 so that they can self-isolate without worrying about paying the bills." Associate Professor Mackay said air-conditioning systems on public transport vehicles helped dilute any viruses and said he was not sure if limiting seats was necessary, given the position Queensland was in. Latest information from Queensland Health. But both Mr Bailey and Brisbane Lord Mayor Adrian Schrinner said patronage levels would be monitored. "If there are issues arising, that's something we're happy to have a look at," Cr Schrinner said. "Ultimately it does require people just to use a bit of common sense to make sure they are as safe as possible." Mr Bailey said extra train services could be added during shoulder peak hours to help give passengers more space. "It will be different to how it was before the pandemic and we'll be monitoring that closely and if we need to make adjustments to that, we will," he said. He said extra cleaning services had been brought on as a precaution. "We've had very strong measures in place since the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic  things like cashless ticketing, rear door boarding on our buses, tripling of cleaning on our trains and we've seen cleaning and hygiene routines right across our modes increase considerably." P&C Queensland chief executive Kevan Goodworth said catching public transport needed to be managed, but he had not heard of any complaints or concerns from parents on the issue. "I think this will come out in the wash next week when we see what happens," Mr Goodworth said. "We are encouraging parents to talk to the schools. "Schools are back on Monday and that's where [the students] need to be." 
Coronavirus has made state borders a battle zone and premiers are manning the barricades
Who'd be Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk right now? Facing a tough election in October, Palaszczuk is coming under huge pressure to open the state's borders, so visitors in search of winter sun can start to get the tourist industry back on its feet. She's in the sights not just of the Federal Government, with Peter Dutton ("a proud Queenslander") leading the charge, but of NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian as well. Ms Palaszczuk so far is holding firm, saying she'll follow the advice of her Chief Health Officer, Jeannette Young.  The border closure will be reviewed monthly; it could stay shut until September, and Dr Young says possibly even longer. It depends on the number of active cases in NSW and Victoria, which have far more than Queensland. It might be Queensland first opens up to South Australia and the Northern Territory before re-opening the border with NSW. In political terms, Ms Palaszczuk is on risky ground whatever she does. Depriving the state's economy of much-needed dollars will give ammunition to her opponents. On the other hand, if an open border led to a serious outbreak in a tourist centre, forcing fresh shutdowns, she'd carry the blame. It's a dilemma to which there is no "correct" answer. So far, Ms Palaszczuk has voters' support in how she's handled the pandemic (although her government's rating is lower than those of other state governments). In the Essential poll published this week, 66 per cent of Queenslanders answered good or very good when asked, "How would you rate your state government's response to the COVID-19 outbreak?" In WA, 86 per cent rated the McGowan Government's performance positively. (The Federal Government received a tick from 73 per cent.) But voters are fickle, and opinions can change quickly. We saw this over kids being in school. At first, many parents insisted their children must stay home; after a few weeks, they were pressing for schools to take them back. The schools debate produced fault lines in the National Cabinet, and now the row over borders is doing the same. That useful body remains intact, but this creates tensions, even though border policies are the decisions of individual states, not the collective. The conflict might also be something of a reality check on the idea the National Cabinet would enable a harmonious road to future economic reform. A notable feature of the COVID federalism model is that under the National Cabinet umbrella, line ups vary according to the issue. Victoria (Labor) and NSW (Coalition) were the loudest in urging early heavy restrictions, including in relation to schools. The Federal Government, with its eye on economics, instinctively preferred a lighter hand; it needed a shove to go further. Where it couldn't be moved and the states had the power, they went their own ways. On schools, Scott Morrison was adamant and always wanted them open. Similarly, it wanted borders opened. The border issue sees another cross-party grouping. The Labor jurisdictions of Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory, and the Liberal states of South Australia and Tasmania all have their borders closed. NSW and Victoria have never gone down this path. Ms Berejiklian is pushing hard for a re-opening to promote recovery. She's suggested Mr McGowan and Ms Palaszczuk are courting popularity. In the crossfire, Mr McGowan has accused Ms Berejiklian of bullying tactics and hit where it hurts. "New South Wales had the Ruby Princess  And they are trying to give us advice on our borders, seriously?" he said this week.  Ms Palaszczuk said: "We are not going to be lectured to by a state that has the highest number of cases in Australia". As notable as the fracture among governments, is the very public division between health experts. We saw this on schools, where Victoria's Chief Health Officer Brett Sutton took a much more conservative position than others. While Dr Young and WA Chief Health Officer Andrew Robertson were adamant this week on keeping their respective borders shut for the time being, federal Deputy Chief Medical Officer Paul Kelly said "from a medical point of view, I can't see why the borders are still closed". (Mr McGowan had earlier said: "I don't know who Paul Kelly is  clearly not the singer".) Dr Kelly said neither the National Cabinet nor the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (that advises it) had made decisions or given advice on state borders. Decisions on what to do were entirely up to the states. Both Dr Young and Dr Robertson are on the AHPPC, which is described as a "consensus body". "We talked through these matters and we decided not to have a position on borders," Dr Kelly explained. While it has been welcome in this crisis to see the politicians turning to the experts, we are now being sharply reminded experts can differ. How often have we heard from politicians in recent weeks, "We are relying on the medical advice"? But that doesn't always lead in one direction, and "consensus" can be a useful concealer. As the border argument intensifies the question of whether the closures are constitutional, canvassed early on in the crisis, has come back. One Nation's Pauline Hanson has accused Ms Palaszczuk of "running roughshod over the constitution", appealed for anyone affected who might want to mount a challenge to come forward, and said "I have a pro-bono, constitutional lawyer who will represent you in a High Court challenge under Section 92". Section 92 provides for "trade, commerce, and intercourse among the states" to be "absolutely free". Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. No-one could be sure how, if there were a case, the High Court would rule. The court in the past has recognised public health circumstances can justify measures that otherwise would breach section 92. But would special circumstances still apply when the virus threat had apparently receded? Attorney-General Christian Porter has dodged questions on whether the border closure could be unconstitutional. Mr Porter, a West Australian, has been measured on the issue itself. "These aren't easy decisions for state premiers to make but there's a health imperative, there's an economic imperative and there are strict constitutional rules around what is permissible and impermissible", he told a news conference on Thursday. He no doubt has in mind the thread of isolationism traditionally running through his state's thinking, and of the polling showing enormous support for the McGowan Government's COVID management. The day before, Mr Porter noted "that the Federal Government's position, on a whole range of issues, is to be forward leaning and develop workarounds to get our economy moving again". Indeed. We can expect the Morrison Government's "forward leaning" will only increase in coming weeks, with its desperation to boost economic activity. Meanwhile, premiers might need their chill pills before they meet, virtually, at National Cabinet next week. Michelle Grattan is a professorial fellow at the University of Canberra and chief political correspondent at The Conversation, where this article first appeared. 
Coronavirus Australia live news: JobKeeper cost slashed by $60b after accounting bungles revealed, NSW to let more people into pubs and restaurants
The number of people on JobKeeper has been revised down by 3 million after Treasury and the Australian Tax Office (ATO) revealed businesses made "significant errors". The estimated cost of the program has been nearly halved from $130 billion to about $70 billion. Look back at how the day's events unfolded. By Jon Healy By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton 
Ten-person dining rule for Sydney restaurants gets mixed response amid NSW coronavirus restrictions
No-show diners have been warned there is a "special place in hell" for them as Sydney restaurants get to grips with the state's 10-person dining rule. Eased NSW coronavirus restrictions, which came into effect last Friday, saw some restaurants and cafes open their doors again with only 10 customers allowed at a time. The newrules meant some eateries got some much-needed financial relief, but many have struggled to make opening worth their while. Surry Hills cocktail bar and restaurant Low 302 reopened this week but required bookings to secure a place.  A post addressing a no-show booking under the name Aimee went up on the bar's Facebook page on Saturday, telling her there was a "special place for you to burn in hospo hell". The post, which referenced the booking for four people, slammed the woman for wasting "40 per cent of the entire capacity". "You didn't have the common courtesy to call us up and cancel," the post read. "Maybe you have no idea the financial impact this has on a restaurant right now. Maybe you don't care. "You have single-handedly set the worst of precedence for our entire industry at this most difficult time." Low 302 now takes payment in advance to secure bookings at the restaurant, something management "really wanted to avoid having to do". Restaurateur BenSiderowitz said taking payment in advance allowed him to create an "experience" for diners while also giving staff security. Mr Siderowitz runs Corner House in Sydney's eastern suburbs and said he took 4,000 bookings after announcing a special dining package. Up to 10 people can book out the venue for four hours for a group fee of $1,000, which includes a private bartender and chef to provide unlimited pizza. "We take the deposit upfront, so if someone doesn't show up it doesn't matter," he said. "We put the onus on the customer, and with lack of supply, demand increases  people just want to snap up the spot." Mr Siderowitz said he stayed up for three nights replying to hundreds of messages that poured in after he announced the deal.  The interest was so great that Mr Siderowitz has secured a second venue, 900 metres down the road from Corner House in Bondi, which opened on Friday. Thanks to low overheads, lean staff numbers and a backlog of stock, Mr Siderowitz said it had been a big week, with most groups spending much more than the $1,000 package. "Revenue may be down 80 per cent but profit is up 100 per cent," he said. Fabio Dore runs One Ford Streetin Balmain and said the week had been fruitful for the popular restaurant. Mr Dore does not take pre-paid bookings but rather relies on the "loyalty of the locals" each night, as he has done for five years.  "I heard about the no-show in the city and I was very disappointed," he said. "It's common-sense thinking: if you book a restaurant, why wouldn't you turn up?" Mr Dore said he was comforted by the "safety net" of the JobKeeper payment for staff, which meant a no-show booking wouldn't damage the night's takings so severely. "But people should support the restaurant so it can survive, so your favourite restaurant is able to make it through this difficult time," he said. He said the 10-person limit had provided an opportunity to adapt the One Ford Street menu while maintaining a premium experience for diners. "Read the situation  if you're smart enough, what you're cooking can be a very good margin," he said. 
What science and tech can teach us about how to deal with a crisis like coronavirus
Changing in a time of crisis is what makes us resilient  in fact, it's what gets us through.  That's the lesson ecologist Brian Walker says we can look to as we come to grips with the coronavirus pandemic. Dr Walker, from the CSIRO, has spent a lifetime studying natural ecosystems including in Africa, Canada and the Australian outback. Each in their own way has brought him to the same conclusion: change in crisis is necessary. Resilience doesn't equal resistance. "If you have a system that you want to maintain, then resilience of that system is the capacity to absorb a disturbance," Dr Walker told The Drum. "And then reorganise as a result of that disturbance in such a way that the next time a disturbance of that kind comes along, they can cope with it better." These ideas, Dr Walker has found, can be applied to human nature. He says they are something for society to consider as we deal with the broad, ongoing impacts of COVID-19. Monash University's Rashina Hoda says observing environmental ecosystems has formed part of the software development process for a while now.  "Some of the research has looked at social networks in ant colonies: how they organise and reorganise around challenges," she said.  When it comes to the coronavirus context, the associate professor at Monash University's Department of Software Systems and Cybersecurity told The Drum that being "agile" is essential. It is a concept traditionally reserved for software engineering teams.  "You've got a swift response, clear policies through consultation with the right experts and at the same time, a very human spirit to all of it."  Dr Hoda believes "agile nations" have been more effective dealing with COVID-19  Australia included.  "I think Australia's done really well." She applauded the government's swift response to the outbreak but says a big part of the relative success has been the community's cooperation and willingness to adapt.  "If we didn't listen in and didn't follow through it would not have been possible, no matter how clear the guidelines."  "If both aren't on board with being agile, it's not going to happenn" she said.  Much as with Dr Walker's ecosystems, Dr Hoda says change is a necessary part of the equation.  "You see countries such as the United States; people who have very strongly resisted this saying we're not going to change, this is the way we live. That kind of response is not the right response to a crisis. "Even if it's just lifestyle choices for a temporary period of time." The Drum looked at the idea of resilience earlier this week and heard how different sections of the community might relate during the COVID-19 crisis.  "Country people are some of the best ones at changing and adapting to new circumstances," National Farmers Federation President Fiona Simson said.  "It's adapting and it's having hope and it's having a vision and knowing that there's something in the future and you've got some control about that." Ms Simson said now is the "perfect time" to have conversations about change, as the immediate COVID-19 threat appears to be subsiding. However, Sydney Morning Herald political editor Peter Hartcher warned Australia's decades of economic success may have left us less open to change and we're dealing with the results of that now. "The consequence was great complacency to the point where there was serious decay in our political system and failure in our ability to adapt to climate change. "We get to a pointless decade of wasted time." Now, he believes, we might be in the midst of real change.  "You're hearing statements like 'we need to think about our global supply chain arrangements' and 'need to rethink the way the medical profession and our hospitals are set up and funded," he said "Those light bulbs are going on." He does warn that statements are no good without real action.  
Australian community sport can survive coronavirus challenges through volunteer spirit
For organised sport the advent of National Volunteer Week can be heart warming and also somewhat problematic. It is a time when administrators reach out to their grassroots workers and acknowledge some of the glowing examples of the dedicated volunteers who keep community clubs on the field. The legendary local coach, the bloke who runs the bar or the canteen, the family that washes the jerseys, the high school kid who operates the all-abilities program and all those who perform one of the many tasks required to keep the most important level of sport ticking along. But, increasingly, the acknowledgement of volunteers can also unwittingly emphasise the widening gap between well-funded professional sports administrators and participants, and those at the base of sporting pyramid reaching into their own pockets to support their communities. Given the challenges created by the COVID-19 shutdown, this month's National Volunteer Week comes at an even more delicate time in the sometimes tense relationship between professional and community sport. As ever, most of the media's emphasis on sport over the past few months has been about the urgent attempts to get the major football codes back on the field to provide content for media partners whose rights deals fund sport  at least notionally  from top to bottom. Given this trickle-down economy, making professional leagues the first priority is justifiable, assuming these sports have demonstrated a genuine commitment to their grassroots competitions and clubs. But sport must be more dependent then ever on the commitment of volunteers over the coming months, even years, as local clubs confront the various financial and logistical hurdles they must clear to get back to training and playing in the midst of the pandemic that has flattened their economies. These challenges have become more stark in recent days as clubs across various codes grapple with the strict protocols they must follow to safely conduct even limited non-contact, small squad training sessions in preparation for still hypothetical seasons. In most cases this involves appointing a safety officer for each group of 10, recording the names and taking the temperatures of participants, ensuring squads are correctly spaced, keeping youngsters who've been cooped up for weeks from climbing all over each other and sanitising equipment. This is after club officials have calculated funding shortfalls from lost sponsorships and matchday revenue, renegotiated ground hire with local councils, considered any further fine print imposed by their leagues and associations, and factored in the health and reputational risks should their club create a COVID-19 outbreak. And before the players kick, throw or a hit a ball they will have to convince residents now using grounds as outdoor gymnasiums to exercise elsewhere, which is potentially the most confronting task of all. This is why a local club president or coach might consider with envy the supposedly "heavy burden" of an NRL or AFL official forced to choose which of several expert assistant coaches, fitness and medical staff will be excluded from their pods and bubbles. This is not to trivialise the plight of those in professional sports who might lose their incomes, rather it is merely to illustrate the very different lives of those well-paid coaches and stars who sometimes suggest "I love the game so much I would do it for nothing" and those who do. What this presents is a test of good faith for those sports administrations who this week lauded their local volunteers. Those peak-level sports administrations that genuinely appreciate the efforts will not just be uttering hollow sentiments about their volunteers. They will cut shrunken cloths in a way that ensures their grassroots commitment is maintained or find other imaginative ways to support clubs suffering hardship. Particularly, they will acknowledge the local clubs  with vastly varying levels of expertise  that were already struggling with the complex challenges of local government red tape, grant applications and other administrative issues before the pandemic put a hole in their funding and pool of volunteers, and threatened club membership numbers. At the same time local clubs might also find out during these even more testing times something about the calibre and the motivation of their own committees and volunteers, and  particularly  their commitment to their broader communities. The best of local volunteers will champion their club's efforts to get players  and particularly juniors  back on the training track despite the tough regulations.  They will understand the importance of maintaining relationships with members, particularly kids who might be lost forever if their connection with the sport is broken during the shutdown. This in itself provides a test for coaches: are you willing to supervise modified sessions that might only be recreational, or is your interest purely in training for competitive games where your own ego is invested in the outcome? While recognising the difficulties of dealing with the new protocols, I suggest the junior coach throwing his or hands in the air because non-contact skills sessions will not be rewarded with trophies and medals at the end of this season might not have been the right coach anyway. What we do know is that the volunteers honoured at this time next year after guiding their clubs through the toughest of times, and in some cases ensuring their survival, will be genuine local heroes. Offsiders will cover all the major issues from across sport, including the football codes' return to play in detail, on Sunday at 10:00am on ABC TV. 
Super funds have been battered by coronavirus, but panic is your worst enemy
The year began so well. In the first seven weeks of 2020, our super funds were charging ahead as the stock market went from record high to record high. It was a continuation of 2019, which had been the best year since 2013, prompting respected ratings house Super Ratings to predict that, "super members have every reason to be optimistic about 2020." Fortunately for Super Ratings, it added this caveat: "But when it comes to a repeat of 2019's double-digit returns, it would be wise to temper expectations." How right they were. Between February 20 and the March 23 the stock market crashed by 36 per cent. If ever you needed convincing that financial markets have become completely divorced from reality, just look at Wall Street's wild swings, writes Ian Verrender.  As a result, according to Super Ratings, the median balanced superannuation fund fell 8.9 per cent in March, while the median growth fund, with its higher exposure to shares, plunged 12.5 per cent. Ouch! If you are closer to the end of your working life than the beginning, and you have hundreds of thousands of dollars in your super fund, that's a lot of money gone in just a few weeks. But, like everything in life, superannuation needs some perspective. The reality is, most superannuation funds are heavily leveraged to the stock market, and markets go up, and they go down. Finding the best super arrangement can be complicated. But it's an important part of you and your family's financial future  and taking steps to improve your retirement savings may be easier than you think. Australia's biggest super fund, Australian Super, tells its members to expect to lose money five years out of 20. The hope is that the gains in the other 15 years will more than make up for the five years of losses. For Australian Super, the average annual return on its balanced fund since inception in 1985 is 9.68 per cent, despite the bad years. The last negative year for Australian Super's balanced fund was at the peak of the global financial crisis in 2009, when it lost 13.4 per cent. Since then it's been 10 consecutive years of gains, seven of them double digits. So, quite understandably, while no one was expecting COVID-19 and the havoc it's wreaked on the global economy, we should not be surprised that, at some point, our super funds were going to have a bad year after a decade of going forward. The reality for our superannuation from what's happened so far this year is that most of the gains from 2019 have been erased. It's not Armageddon, and we still have the benefits of the previous nine consecutive years of positive returns. Which raises a really important question. If you are losing a lot of sleep about what's happening to your superannuation in 2020, maybe you are in the wrong fund? Financial adviser Louise Lakomy, from Crystal Wealth Partners, told the ABC she received a big spike in calls from worried clients as the stock market tanked in March. "And that raised in my mind the issue of risk profile," she said. "If you are going to react so severely to your super going backwards, are you in the right risk profile for you?" A key tenet of investing is to choose investments that match your tolerance for risk or, more accurately, your tolerance for seeing your investment go backwards. As efforts to control COVID-19 appear to be gaining traction, many analysts and traders are hoping for a quick return to business as usual. They're likely to be disappointed, writes Ian Verrender. After a decade of seeing their super funds going onwards and upwards there are many people who are probably shocked to see them losing money and, at the same time, realising they would probably rather be in a fund that's not as exposed to the share market. The problem of course is that to change investing strategy now  to a more conservative, less share market-focussed option  is to crystallise the losses and, even worse, as Louise Lakomy explained. "No one rings a bell at the bottom of the market," she said. "If you're out of the market you'll miss the recovery." The year 2009 is a case in point. After being devastated by the GFC, the stock market hit its low point on February 28 that year. A stunning turnaround followed and by the end of 2009 it had soared by 46 per cent. While superannuation is not set and forget, it is a long-term investment that will go up and down, and we shouldn't overreact to the downs. One thing history has taught us is that the stock market may fall further, but it will come roaring back. The only thing we don't know is when. 
Australian theatre companies faced with arts funding cuts and the coronavirus shutdown get creative
Life is slowly beginning to come back to some degree of normalcy in many parts of Australia, with easing restrictions seeing cinemas open again and a trip to the pub in sight. But live performing arts  whether that's delighting in a blockbuster musical, taking in the opera or seeing the latest in independent and experimental theatre  looks like one of the last things that will return to normal when this pandemic is under control. Our performing arts companies have had to cancel shows and shutter their doors since mid-March, cutting off what for many is their main income stream.  Earlier this month, COVID-19 claimed its first major arts scalp: Carriageworks  Australia's biggest multi-arts venue  went into administration due to a combination of lost income from the venue closure, insufficient reserves and a last-minute failure to secure its anticipated state government funding. Hear the latest stories from stages across the country. Elsewhere in the arts sector, companies are reeling from the latest funding round announcement by the Australia Council, the Federal Government's arts funding body, which left 49 previously funded small-to-medium arts organisations without four-year operational funding. We asked five companies  from major players to smaller companies without federal funding  how they are faring through the shutdown.  Their answers highlight fears around the uncertain future and significant hurdles to overcome, as well as the creative ways they are adapting to the sector's shutdown.  Julian Louis is the artistic director and CEO of the Northern Rivers Performing Arts Group (NORPA), a theatre company based in Lismore in northern New South Wales. NORPA has had to cancel six productions and postpone another. The company's income has taken an additional hit from cancelled venue hire. While they have been able to keep their core staff on through the JobKeeper program, this doesn't include artists (who are employed on short-term contracts, making them ineligible for the scheme). Louis told RN's The Stage Show that during the shutdown he's asked his staff "to work outside their normal spheres, to think about the company differently  and it's actually [been] a very creative time". "It's a rare time where you're not under the pressure of an opening night [coming up], ticket sales and box office success. So we're actually looking at renewing ourselves, which is really valuable and very rare." Louis says that despite the setbacks of COVID-19, his company's future is secure after NORPA found themselves on the right side of the Australia Council's recent funding decisions. That means that from 2021, NORPA will have four-year-funding for the first time in its 27-year history. "I know that [federal arts funding] is a very small pie though, and the number of companies that miss out on this, and we've been one in the past  and it's devastating," says Louis. The arts sector's current funding crisis can be traced back to 2015, when George Brandis, then minister for the arts, siphoned $104.7 million away from the Australia Council into the National Programme for Excellence in the Arts, a fund distributed at his discretion. "The Federal Government really has not increased its funding as our industry has grown," says Louis. In the last financial year, the Australia Council distributed $186 million of funding (across the entire sector, from the Major Performing Arts companies down to individual artists), down from $199.2 million in 2013-2014 (which, adjusted for inflation, is equivalent to $216 million today). Perth children's theatre company Barking Gecko is one of the 49 companies that will lose federal funding from 2021.  "The funding announcement coming right in the middle of COVID-19 has really created a perfect storm and taken the planks of stability out from under the company," says artistic director Luke Kerridge.  "The worry is not the short-term but the medium-term." Barking Gecko has had to postpone their 2020 season due to COVID-19, including their ambitious touring plans and the creation of new work. "Then [we had to] pivot really quickly and reimagine what right now looks like, and what 2021 looks like," says Kerridge. Kerridge says that by accessing JobKeeper and repurposing touring funds they have been able to retain their staff, which has enabled them to launch a new digital initiative to continue connecting and creating with children through the shutdown: Isolate > Create > Connect. This program sees Barking Gecko partner with Indian youth arts company ThinkArts to deliver weekly creative tasks to children, designed by artists. Despite the challenges wrought by both the pandemic and the funding decision, Kerridge is feeling "strangely optimistic". "My hope is that coming back together in a physical space will take on more meaning post-COVID; maybe we will enjoy that sense of togetherness more now that we've seen that we can take it for granted." Kerridge and his team are looking forward to returning to the production that Barking Gecko had been developing before the shutdown  House  which has an eerily timely story. "It's about characters who wait out a storm in a house, and then have to summon the resilience to go back out there once it's over." At the end of last year, Lee Lewis left the intimacy of Sydney's 105-seat Griffin theatre to become artistic director of Queensland Theatre  a major performing arts (MPA) company funded through the MPA framework. Queensland Theatre has two spaces  the larger one with 350 seats  and Lewis says they've had to scale back hours at the company and let some of their staff go (the company is a statutory body of the Queensland Government, and thus ineligible for JobKeeper). "We're talking about the next steps beyond that, depending on how long this goes for. If we manage to perform before the end of the year, then we're hoping to minimise that impact," Lewis says. "But if it goes longer than we're projecting at the moment, then there's not a lot of great future for the permanency of this company." With no income from performances, Queensland Theatre's expenditure nonetheless continues: they are still delivering their education program to 100 schools around the state (which they've now taken online), staffing the winding down of their subscription season  and starting to plan for the eventual re-opening.  Lewis says mounting plays at the scale of Queensland Theatre is costly and would be unsustainable with the reduced audience entailed by social distancing restrictions. "I feel like the Federal Government, especially, just doesn't have any interest in addressing the problems that we're facing in the arts community. And that was before the shutdown," Lewis says. "I feel like we've failed as an industry to convince government over the last 20 years of our inherent worth to the society that we live in. I think we've got to stop trying to lobby government and I think we've got to take our focus back to winning over audiences." Queensland Ballet, also funded through the MPA framework, employs 180 people (including 60 dancers) and has been able to keep staff on through the JobKeeper scheme. Artistic director Li Cunxin says that the first step the company took once they knew the shutdown was imminent was "creating as much online content as possible". This has included classes and coaching sessions for the dancers as well as the public. They also had to get flooring and portable ballet barres out to their dancers so that they could stay fit at home. Cunxin says there are two priorities for his company at the moment: "One is to keep our team together  So during these isolation period times  [when things try] to pull us apart, we have to be even stronger as a team." "And the second thing for us is really planning ahead to not only survive this pandemic but also emerge a stronger and more focused organisation." Queensland Ballet performs in a theatre with a capacity of 2,000, making a return to "business as usual" highly unlikely in the short term; accordingly, the company has made the decision to move its entire 2020 season to 2021. "[But] we obviously still have expenses we have to pay. And our 60-year anniversary gala was pulled a week before [it was scheduled to take place]  so the whole program [was] set, choreographed, rehearsed, we had overseas creatives fly in," Cunxin says. The company is forecasting a 43 per cent decline in revenue for 2020 but is hoping donors and corporate partners will step up, launching   a campaign and website to generate donations. Queensland Ballet will also be releasing 60 new short dance works on this platform, choreographed by their dancers and commissioned to celebrate the company's 60th anniversary. "I do hope when we come out of this that we all will be able to continue to practice or deliver the magic of this art form," says Cunxin. Declan Greene is the new artistic director of Griffin  the country's only theatre company dedicated to new Australian writing, which performs works in the 105-seat SBW Stables Theatre in Sydney's Darlinghurst. "You're literally breathing the same air as the performers, but that sounded a lot more appealing before COVID," says Greene. Griffin have retained their casual front-of-house, box office and bar staff  who are directors and playwrights with their own artistic practices  in part-time jobs as literary associates during the shutdown. They were also able to pay the actors and creatives for their production of Kindness, which was scheduled to open shortly after the shutdown began. He says that they were in the financial position to do so because the first show of the 2020 season  David Williamson's Family Values  "far exceeded its box office targets". Griffin receives funding from the Australia Council and Create NSW, and is supported by philanthropy; Greene says they are unlikely to share Carriageworks' fate. "The more troubling thing for us is just  it's obviously a hugely uncertain world that we're attempting to plan for." None of the artistic directors we spoke to know when, or for how long, social distancing measures will be eased enough to allow for performances. "So it just becomes very, very unpredictable about just how we  still manage to employ artists to make art, which is something that is a huge priority for the company," he says. In the meantime, the company undertook an experimental program of works called Griffin Lock-in, in which they paid five artists to make one-off performances for live streaming. "It's really interesting to explore ways that we can kind of create liveness and create a sense of live theatrical community online," Greene says. His interest in online performance extends beyond the pandemic, "because there are a lot of accessibility barriers in theatre as well, which are sometimes financial  and also [sometimes] to do with just access for neurodiverse and disabled folk". "So that's definitely something I want to continue exploring as a company." 
Africa has not been hit hard by coronavirus yet, but the disease could 'smoulder' there for years
Oluwaseun Ayodeji Osowobi left London triumphant and exhausted, but satisfied. She had gone to the UK to lobby for her Nigerian organisation, Stand to End Rape, and be the flag bearer at the annual Commonwealth Day ceremony. She even met Prince Charles at a glamorous reception in London. But on the plane back to Lagos in mid-March, Ms Osowobi started to feel extremely ill. "I thought that maybe I had malaria, maybe I was tired because I'd had a busy week I didn't think it was coronavirus," she told the ABC.  The symptoms worsened when she got home.  "I was experiencing diarrhoea, I was vomiting, I was nauseous, I couldn't eat, I lost my sense of taste  it was a very tough period for me," Ms Osowobi said.  The 29-year-old, who is a prominent campaigner against sexual violence in Nigeria, had heard about the global spread of coronavirus and quickly got herself tested.  The positive result made her one of the African continent's first confirmed cases of COVID-19.  "It was new in Nigeria. I was the third case and the first female, actually and it was very scary," she said. Her case of COVID-19 was so bad that she became fearful she might die.  "With the number of deaths recorded globally, I was almost certain I might not pull through, surviving the virus." But when she recovered and went public with her experiences, she was attacked online and accused of lying.  With the backing of health authorities and international agencies, she released a video urging others to practice social distancing and get themselves tested.  "I was the first person actually in Nigeria to come forward about surviving COVID-19 and I had photos, I had evidence to back up my story," she said. "When that video was published people still said 'how much was I paid by the government?', 'what kind of lie was I sharing online?', so it was very sad to read that." In Nigeria, like a number of countries in Africa, many people were sceptical about the virus, suspecting governments were exaggerating the threat.  Myths circulated in Nigeria that the disease only affected rich people or would be killed by hot weather. "It is reflecting an attitude of disbelief and lack of trust in the system," Ms Osowobi said of her doubters. "They thought the Government was using the virus to embezzle money or get donations." Coronavirus has been slow to spread across Africa, but Ms Osowobi's experience shows some of the challenges the continent could face when COVID-19 takes hold.  There are about 85,000 confirmed cases of African COVID-19, according to the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. For a continent with more than one billion residents, that's a comparatively low infection rate.  Meanwhile, the United States has more than one million cases of COVID-19 among its 328 million citizens.  The World Health Organisation says transmission rates have been much lower in Africa than elsewhere because of poor transport networks and low levels of economic integration.  Several African nations also implemented restrictions early on in the pandemic, according to the WHO's Emergency Operations Manager in Africa, Dr Michel Yao. "Some countries even started the measures before receiving cases so this could have slowed down the process," Dr Michel Yao told the ABC.  "Most of the first cases were imported so it was within a certain class of people who can afford to travel. It was not in the high-density places where the disease can spread faster." Dr Yao says the outbreak has not yet reached many rural areas.  "We face a situation that the number of cases is increasing as detection capacity increases, but it's not at the level that was experienced in China or Europe or the USA," he said.  Some African countries have even reported the number of active cases dropping to zero, but Dr Yao told the ABC that does not mean authorities could relax.  "We are very worried about 24 countries in sub-Saharan Africa and also Algeria. Half of them have community transmission and this is our main worry," he said. "If this community transmission moves into the high-density areas the situation could change, so we are not saying the situation is under control." The slow spread had led the WHO to predict the disease could "smoulder" in Africa, meaning localised outbreaks could continue for years. Some fear that if the rest of the world moves on while Africa continues to suffer from outbreaks, that would lead to greater travel restrictions, increased economic hardship and irregular migration to Europe and elsewhere. A massive testing and tracing effort is underway to prevent the disease from becoming entrenched. The Africa Centres for Disease Control (CDC) says health authorities will test 10 million people over the next six months. The CDC deputy director Dr Ahmed Ogwell Ouma said he doubted African nations would become a reservoir for COVID-19 because of their experience dealing with epidemics like the outbreaks of Ebola.  "We are way more prepared than many countries in the world and we are prepared because we have had huge epidemics before," he said. "We are going to get a very good control over this virus in a shorter time than others have done, simply because we have learnt lessons from previous outbreaks and we are using those lessons to try to contain the spread of the virus," he said.  African nations have some of the lowest rates of intensive care beds per capita, but few countries have faced excessive demand yet.  The WHO said this is because African nations have a much younger population than Europe and the US. In some countries, only 2 per cent of the population is above the age of 60.  They have also pointed out that some nations have recorded high rates of asymptomatic cases and low numbers of cases with severe complications. But there are countries where a questionable government response could be clouding the extent of the crisis. In Tanzania, President John Magufuli has refused to shut places of worship, while also casting doubt on testing and questioning the danger of the virus. Tanzania's Government has not reported new case figures since April 29. Meanwhile, in Burundi, the country's repressive Government expelled the WHO team after facing criticism for its lax response to the pandemic. Burundi pressed ahead with an election on May 20 despite the presence of the disease.  Many countries still have active conflicts, making it difficult for health authorities to implement containment and testing.  Even once African nations get through the pandemic, they could face another crisis: a lack of food caused by economic disruptions and lockdowns, which have come at the same time as locust plagues and drought in East Africa.  Joseph Siegel, the director of research for the Africa Centre for Strategic Studies, studied the effects of the Spanish flu pandemic on African nations and found that starvation was widespread.  "The bulk of the pandemic happened in 1918 but a lot of the famine and near-famine conditions happened in 1919, so I think for Africa we want to be keeping an eye on food production and helping to protect that," Mr Siegel said. "With so many people living off subsistence wages now, the food crisis is already affecting people."  
Victoria's VCE exams to start in early November, bringing certainty to students amid coronavirus disruption
Victoria's year 12 students will begin to sit their final exams in early November after weeks of uncertainty and disruption as schools prepare for students to return from next week. Many students were anxious about exams spilling over into 2021 with a potential disruption to higher education ambitions. But the Andrews Government now says exams will all be completed by December 2, which is two weeks later than the original completion date of November 18 set before the pandemic. The announcement comes as year 11 and 12 students as well as prep, year 1 and year 2 students prepare to return to the classroom next Tuesday after nearly six weeks of remote learning. With VCE exams to be finished at the start of December, year 12 students will receive their ATAR score before the end of 2020, rather than January 2021, which was feared at the height of the COVID-19 crisis. VCE exams will begin in the week starting November 9, which is a month earlier than expected when learning from home was first announced. The changes mean university offers can be made to Victorian students in time for the start of the 2021 academic year. Education Minister James Merlino said on Friday the Victorian Curriculum and Assessment Authority (VCAA) had made "tweaks" to Unit 4 VCE content and assessments in light of COVID-19, but said exams would not be altered. Mr Merlino said starting exams in November meant "no disadvantage for Victorian students in terms of university and other pathways". "The pathway for students will be exactly the same as students right around the country," he said. But Portland Bayview College principal Michelle Kearney told the ABC Mr Merlino's comments were "a very urban-centric viewpoint". She said regional students should be granted special consideration because of poor quality internet during the lockdown compared to their metro counterparts. "That's one of the things that has been an issue for us. The lack of real reliability of the internet for some of our Zoom lessons that we've had with our students," she said. "Regional students need to have special entry consideration looked at." The Australian Principals Federation previously called for year 12 exams to be axed this year, after concerns the crisis would leave many students unfairly disadvantaged. Year 12 student at Minaret College Rumaan Baryala is a member of the Victorian Student Representative Council and told ABC Radio Melbourne the announcement was the first time he was "glad to hear about an exam timetable". Updated Sunday, May 24 Mr Baryala said he was "really happy to receive clarity" about the exams and students' chances of getting in university in 2021. "Obviously I'm still going to be anxious about [COVID-19] when I return back to the classroom, it will still be in the back of my mind. But we'll try to distract ourselves as much as we can," Mr Baryala said. Alice, who is also in year 12, told ABC Radio Melbourne remote learning had brought its challenges and not being around others had been difficult. "This has come at a good time, waiting this long has been good because we haven't been jumping around and changing routines. It has been nice to slow down life and be able to focus on our study routine," she said. Mr Merlino said it was too early to tell if there would be a notable rise in the number of year 12 students applying for special consideration this year. Schools in Victoria will have a pupil-free day on Monday before year 11 and 12 students as well as prep, year 1 and year 2 students return to the classroom on Tuesdayafter almost six weeks of remote learning. Those who teach other year levels will conduct home learning from the school. Mr Merlino said staggered pick-up and drop-off times would be implemented to prevent parents congregating at the school gate but physical distancing would not take place in classrooms. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Mr Merlino also said the Government had advised schools to provide refunds of schools fees to parents for things like camps and excursions. "Those things won't be part of school life for some time yet," he said. "We're giving some common sense advice to schools, in terms of parent fees for those kinds of extracurricular activities." Mr Merlino said the Government was supporting and working closely with schools that had been financially impacted by COVID-19. Mr Merlino said he understood some teachers, parents and students would be concerned about their health when students returned to the classroom. He referenced a "significant increase in funding to make sure that schools are cleaned regularly" and said hand sanitiser, guidelines for within schools and the huge drive to voluntarily test teachers were in place to protect the health of students and staff. He said 10,000 school staff had been tested for coronavirus over the last 10 days and none had tested positive. State schools will be staggering lunch, recess and library visiting times to avoid students in different year levels coming into contact with one another. "Each school will work through this on a school-by-school basis," Mr Merlino said. Playgrounds will be open for students in schools and cleaned regularly but water fountains are off-limits. 
Cyclone Mangga heading for WA, bringing rain, wind and waves as coronavirus travel bans ease
A rare out-of-cycle cyclone that has formed into a category one system in the Indian Ocean is set to bring dangerous weather to Western Australia, including Perth, from Sunday. Tropical Cyclone Mangga will impact the Cocos Keeling Islands today before tracking towards WA. The official Australian cyclone season ends on April 30 and the Bureau of Meteorology (BOM) said while some cyclones were known to form in early May, it was rare to see one so late in the month. The Cyclone Mangga was located about 515 kilometres north-west of the Cocos Keeling Islands just before midnight and was expected to pass to the west of the islands later today, potentially resulting in heavy rainfall and a period of gale-force winds.  The BOM said it was expected to weaken tomorrow as it continued to move south-east towards WA's north-west coast and was "highly unlikely to be a tropical cyclone" come Sunday. Senior forecaster Luke Huntington said the combination of a tropical low and a cold front occurring at the same time, especially this time of year, was out of the ordinary. "We don't normally see this system at all, really, so it's quite unprecedented," he said. "If it was going to happen, it would be earlier in the summer period when we do get the tropical cyclones and lows  but to have it this late in the season, it is quite unusual. "It's just a coincidence the cold front came up at the same time and it's just going to deepen this low as it comes down towards the west coast, and create all that rain and the damaging winds." Torrential rain and dangerous winds are expected to come from the state's north-west before extending south-east over the remainder of the state on Sunday and Monday. "We can expect widespread damaging winds of around 100 kilometres an hour and in some regions it could even exceed 125kph," Mr Huntington said. "There's also some quite significant rainfall associated with it as well  in isolated areas, particularly along the west coast, some areas could receive even up to 100 millimetres." BOM spokesman Neil Bennett said yesterday it was "an evolving and dynamic system" that would still pack a punch on Sunday as it tracked down the west coast. "It'll produce severe weather, in terms of wind, some heavy rainfall in places and significant wave heights," he said. "We're looking at dangerous swells, severe weather warnings for the winds and possibly some heavy rainfall as well  right up and down the west coast." BOM has cautioned that it was still too early to pinpoint which areas would be hardest hit, but a prolonged period of strong winds was expected. Do you know how cyclones could affect you and what to pack in your survival kit? Take our quiz to see how prepared you really are. It said at this stage, rainfall totals in Pilbara coastal areas were likely to be about 2040mm, with isolated falls from Karratha to Kalbarri of up to 100mm. Heavy rain is also possible along coastal areas from Kalbarri to Albany, including Perth, with totals of about 2030mm and some isolated falls up to 70mm. At least 510mm is forecast for much of the Wheatbelt, with areas closer to the west coast expecting 1020mm. Peak wave heights in excess of 8 metres are predicted for much of the west coast on Monday and they have the potential to cause significant beach erosion, while storm tides could lead to coastal inundation. The severe weather will coincide with the first weekend since regional travel restrictions were eased in WA, with an influx of people expected on the roads. But fine weather is forecast for most of the state until Sunday, providing plenty of opportunity to tie down loose items around the home and clear out gutters. Here's a guide to help you work out what will be allowed from May 18 and what is still offlimits. In WA, late autumn and winter rainfall usually comes in the form of cold fronts. The BOM has described this system as a "rare event"  the result of the remnants of a tropical low interacting with a cold front coming up from the south. "This sort of system has happened in the past, but it's something that would probably only happen once every two or three years, maybe even once every five to 10," Mr Bennett said. A similar event occurred in June 2012, which led to more than 600 calls for assistance and more than 170,000 homes losing power. Squally winds and rain are also forecast for Monday but conditions should gradually ease throughout the day. 
Coronavirus border wars have NSW, WA, Queensland premiers playing firmly to their home crowds
They're not neighbours, yet somehow New South Wales and Western Australia have managed to engage themselves in a border skirmish. The verbal grenades between the two state's premiers have created fresh cracks in the relatively harmonious cooperation between the states and territories over coronavirus. So what's really going on? While a medical expert panel drove the decision to shut Australia's international borders, decision-making about domestic travel has been made by individual states and territories. Those with closed borders  the Northern Territory, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania and Western Australia  have cited health reasons for their reluctance to reopen them too quickly. But NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian clearly has her state's economy in mind as she calls for these borders to reopen. NSW is heavily reliant on tourism and even though it's unlikely to see international travellers for some time, allowing more domestic holiday-makers would help struggling accommodation, food and entertainment businesses. Last year, 39 million domestic travellers visited New South Wales, spending more than $23.5 billion. Almost $10 billion of this was spent by 14.8 million holidaymakers. In comparison, just over 4 million domestic travellers chose to holiday in WA, spending more than $3 billion. WA's border closure  creating what Premier Mark McGowan dubbed "an island within an island"  has not dramatically hurt the state's all-important resources industry. Interstate fly-in, fly-out workers have been able to enter the state because the resources industry was deemed an essential service by the WA Government. So borders aren't as big an economic issue for WA as they are for NSW. But clearly the spat is not just about economics, as Ms Berejiklian suggested to ABC News Breakfast this morning. "I'm sure those premiers are getting more popular in their states for keeping their borders closed," she said. Her theory could help explain why the Queensland Government has joined in on the border wars, despite the importance of domestic tourism to the local economy. More than 10 million holidaymakers spent more than $9.5 billion there last year and its tourism industry wants the borders reopened. Yet today Queensland Tourism Minister Mark Bailey echoed Mr McGowan in saying NSW was in no position to be "lecturing" other states. WA has closed its borders to the east for the first time in history. Here's how you might be affected. "NSW needs to get its act together and get community transmission down, and we will all be better off throughout this nation, including in Queensland," he said. Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk faces an election in just over five months, which Peter Kennedy, Adjunct Professor of politics at Notre Dame University, said was a key factor in her Government's stance. "I think the Labor Government in Queensland does have a close eye on that poll, understandably, and they would be playing to what they believe to be the best interests of Queenslanders and what also would be electorally popular," he said. In the Northern Territory last week, Chief Minister Michael Gunner was keen to remind his citizens that they lived in the "safest place in Australia" as he poured the first beer since pubs reopened last week. In WA, where the rest of Australia is known as "the Eastern States" and Liberal politicians debated a "WAxit" secession motion just three years ago, Mr McGowan has also played to the local crowd. Mr McGowan has claimed WA was being "bullied" by NSW and said he didn't want to be told what to do by a state which allowed the Ruby Princess coronavirus outbreak to occur.  "New South Wales had the Ruby Princess  I mean, seriously? And they are trying to give us advice on our borders, seriously?" he said yesterday. With sky-high approval ratings, he is undoubtedly keen to maintain this domestic support when he contests the next state election in March. "Western Australians don't like being told by other states what to do, but this is one example where our geographic isolation has worked in our favour," Professor Kennedy said. Latest information from the WA Health Department But the state's health experts have been clear public safety is driving the decision-making in WA, which has a relatively low level of coronavirus infections. For this reason, West Australians still can't even travel freely within their state, due to regional border closures, let alone to other parts of the nation. And that's unlikely to change anytime soon. 
Unfair dismissal claims shoot up 70pc amid coronavirus, Fair Work Commission says
Unfair dismissal claims have increased by 70 per cent during the coronavirus crisis, with the Fair Work Commission dealing with an "unprecedented" caseload. The Senate's dedicated COVID-19 inquiry has been grilling public servants in Canberra today, trying to get the latest snapshot of the workforce as the nation continues to grapple with the economic impact of the pandemic. Bernadette O'Neill, general manager of the Fair Work Commission (FWC), said the rate of complaints coming through her agency was "significantly higher than any other period". "Dismissal claims have been reasonably constant over a number of years now," she told the committee. "We have seen a modest increase through the course of this financial year to date. "But what we're seeing at the moment, and the latest figures that I've got, is an increase of more than 70 per cent in unfair dismissal claims. "I think it's fair to say that an explanation clearly is COVID-19." According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, 594,000 Australians lost their job in April as the pandemic squeezed the Australian economy. Given the widespread economic shockwaves caused by the outbreak, and the tough social restrictions which have forced many businesses to close their doors, the FWC believes the figures were not entirely unexpected. "Internal research that we've done, for example, points to a positive correlation between unemployment levels and retrenchment rates and unfair dismissal claims," Ms O'Neill said. Community legal centres had been preparing for an influx in requests for help during the pandemic, expecting an increase in employment and tenancy disputes. A Fair Work Commission spokesperson told the ABC there had been a significant spike in staff and employers contacting the Fair Work Ombudsman about workplace issues arising from the pandemic. During April, more than 75 per cent of COVID-19 calls related to JobKeeper, most of which were from employees. Last month's unemployment figures showed close to 600,000 jobs had been lost since the beginning of the economic downturn. The headline unemployment rate rose to 6.2 per cent, but Treasury Secretary Steven Kennedy told the Senate committee that the real number of people who were out of work was sitting at around 15 per cent. The Commonwealth's JobKeeper wage subsidy program, which came into effect at the beginning of May and is due to operate for six months, has already paid out $8.1 billion to recipients. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. It is estimated the 900,000 businesses that have registered for the JobKeeper program employ more than 6 million staff between them. The Senate committee questioned senior Treasury officials, including secretary Steven Kennedy, about how much Commonwealth support had flowed to Australians doing it tough through the virus-fuelled downturn. More than 1.6 million Australians have made applications to access their superannuation early, and withdrawals have hit $13.2 billion. The Federal Government tweaked the rules for early access to superannuation in cases of financial hardship early on in the coronavirus outbreak. People can access $10,000 this financial year and another $10,000 from July 1. 
Generation Z employees pose dilemma for some employers, and technology is key for retaining younger staff
Grocery outlet owner, Kevin Allen, hired three Generation Z butchery apprentices, none of whom completed their training, before he found 'the one'. Mr Allen said while taking a seminar led by a workplace psychologist, he learnt that Gen Z workers, born from the mid-1990s onwards, were raised in a different technological age from that of their predecessors, the Millennials, born from the mid-80s to the mid-90s. Adopting workplace technology more suitable to his younger workers led to better communication and happier staff, he said. "I've opened up a Messenger account on my phone, and I've got every single employee on the Messenger now, so I can send a message out to them all individually," Mr Allen said Regular team meetings where employees could discuss any challenges they were facing had also helped, he said. "If there's any problems we're all talking about it together," Mr Allen said. "I'm hoping to make my employees happier, which it is, and then it makes my life and my job much easier." Psychologist Danielle Buckley has been providing advice to employers on how to bridge the generational gap with young employees and keep Gen Zs in their jobs. Part of the solution to the challenges created by different generational attitudes, Ms Buckley said, was embracing the role of technology in communicating with  and training  Gen Z employees. And statistics suggest that bridging the generational gap is an ongoing issue for many employers. The number of people choosing to take up apprenticeships and traineeships has plummeted by a third since the Coalition took office, according to data from the Department of Education. According to Apprenticeship Careers Australia general manager, Luke Radford, completion rates for apprenticeships in New South Wales are as low as 45 per cent in some trades, with the hospitality and automotive industries among those struggling the most to keep their young employees. That was why he retained Ms Buckley to offer advice to employers on how to better connect with their young workers. Mr Radford said there were several reasons apprenticeship dropout rates were so high. He said young people were applying for jobs that were available, or that their parents suggested, rather than identifying trades and employers they were best suited to. However, Mr Radford said he also saw the generational gap causing problems between older employers and younger apprentices and trainees, especially when it came to technology. "Most of the communication that young people do is via apps or via different text messages and the like," he said. "We spend a lot of time communicating via text rather than phone calls, because they don't pick up our phone calls; they communicate via text to us." Beyond the difference in technological uptake, Ms Buckley said the current Generation Z apprentices had a different mindset from that of Millennials. "Unlike the earlier generation, the Millennials, who grew up with the emergence of technology, our Gen Zs have been raised with technology in the palm of their hand," she said. You don't have to have been born between 1946 and 1964 to feel confused about the "OK boomer" phenomenon. Here's how the phrase went all over the internet. "Because of that they've got so much access to information and platforms.  "And this really informs the way that they are, the way they think and the things they believe." According to Ms Buckley, this access to information has led to a generation of young people that wants to build meaningful relationships and work in a way that helps solve problems that the world is facing, from climate change to terrorism. Ms Buckley said Generation Z also had a desire for stability that was different to the generation before it. "Us psychologists say they [Millennials] grew up in the world of the self-esteem movement of parenting where your parents said, 'You can be anything, the world's your oyster'," she said. "But now we're seeing kids today faced with [real-world problems]  I mean look at what's gone down in the world in the last 12 months. "We've had floods, we've had fires, we've got the coronavirus going around the world as well." Another important component to apprenticeship success is making sure that the values of the employer and employee are well-matched, Ms Buckley said. "Everybody is different, and we want businesses to start thinking about, not just 'I want an apprentice', but what sort of person and what sort of culture do you want your business to have," he said. "What we're seeing with young people, particularly Gen Z, is that they want organisations or businesses who match their values  we've seen this more and more. "We saw recently some bands who have said 'no' to playing different concerts because of the carbon footprint they're creating, and I think this really highlights some of the attitudes of young people today." 
Donald Trump's campaign sues New York Times for libel over Russia opinion piece
President Donald Trump's re-election campaign is filing a libel suit accusing the New York Times of intentionally publishing a false opinion article that suggested Russia and the campaign had an overarching deal in the 2016 US election. In an escalation of the Republican President's long-running battle with the news media, campaign officials said the lawsuit was being filed in state court in New York. Asked about the lawsuit at a White House news conference Mr Trump said the Times had "got a lot wrong over the last number of years". Mr Trump said he would let the lawsuit "work its way through the courts. And there'll be more coming". A campaign statement said the aim of the suit against the Times, among the most prominent American news organisations, was to hold the newspaper "accountable for intentionally publishing false statements against President Trump's campaign." There are five main takeaways from Robert Mueller's report on Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election. The lawsuit relates to a March 27, 2019, opinion article written by Max Frankel, who served as executive editor of the Times from 1986 to 1994. A draft copy of the suit, attached to a campaign news release, accused the newspaper of "extreme bias against and animosity toward the campaign", and cited what it called the Times' "exuberance to improperly influence the presidential election in November 2020". Mr Trump is seeking re-election on November 3. In a statement, a New York Times spokesperson said: "The Trump campaign has turned to the courts to try to punish an opinion writer for having an opinion they find unacceptable. "Fortunately, the law protects the right of Americans to express their judgments and conclusions, especially about events of public importance. We look forward to vindicating that right in this case." The newspaper's spokesperson said it had not been served with the suit and learned about it through media reports. Mr Trump's criticism of what he calls liberal bias in the US news media plays well with his conservative political base and often generates applause at his political rallies where his supporters often jeer journalists.  Mr Trump often refers to various news media outlets as "fake news" and has called elements of the US news media "the enemy of the American people". The New York Times was involved in a landmark 1964 Supreme Court ruling that has served as a safeguard for media reporting on public figures.  In the case New York Times v Sullivan, the court decided that the US Constitution's First Amendment protection for freedom of the press allows even statements that are false to be published as long as the publication was not done with "actual malice". The suit, according to the draft copy released by the campaign, accused the newspaper of a "malicious motive" and "reckless disregard for the truth". Benjamin Zipursky, a professor at Fordham University School of Law, said the lawsuit was unlikely to succeed because US defamation law does not allow liability for a sincerely held belief about a public figure, like Mr Trump. He said judges would be sceptical of the claims and inclined to dismiss them. "They're going to be very concerned with the First Amendment implications of allowing a case like this to move forward," he said. Senator Bernie Sanders, the front-runner in the race for the Democratic nomination to face Mr Trump in the November election, denounced the lawsuit. "Trump has called the press the 'enemy of the people,' and now  taking a page from his dictator friends around the world  is trying to dismantle the right to a free press in the First Amendment by suing the New York Times for publishing an opinion column about his dangerous relationship with Russia," Mr Sanders said. Former special counsel Robert Mueller documented Moscow's campaign of hacking and social media propaganda to boost Mr Trump's 2016 candidacy and harm his Democratic opponent Hillary Clinton. It documented numerous contacts between people associated with Mr Trump's campaign and Russians. Mr Mueller found insufficient evidence to show a criminal conspiracy between Mr Trump's team and Russia but did not exonerate Mr Trump of obstruction of justice related to the investigation. In the opinion piece, Mr Frankel stated: "Collusion  or a lack of it  turns out to have been the rhetorical trap that ensnared President Trump's pursuers." Mr Frankel added: "There was no need for detailed electoral collusion between the Trump campaign and Vladimir Putin's oligarchy because they had an overarching deal: the quid of help in the campaign against Hillary Clinton for the quo of a new pro-Russian foreign policy, starting with relief from the Obama administration's burdensome economic sanctions. The Trumpites knew about the quid and held out the prospect of the quo." These are main characters in Robert Mueller's investigation into Russian meddling in the 2016 Presidential election, and any charges they face (or have faced). Quid pro quo is a Latin term meaning a favour in exchange for a favour. Mr Trump in January 2018 criticised US defamation laws as "a sham and a disgrace" following publication of a book by author Michael Wolff called Fire and Fury: Inside the Trump White House, which among other things questioned the President's mental health. Conservative Justice Clarence Thomas last year urged his Supreme Court colleagues to consider overturning the New York Times v Sullivan precedent. In a statement on the suit, Jenna Ellis, senior legal adviser to Mr Trump's campaign, said: "The statements were and are 100 per cent false and defamatory." "The complaint alleges the Times was aware of the falsity at the time it published them, but did so for the intentional purpose of hurting the campaign, while misleading its own readers in the process." Reuters 
Six dead in Milwaukee shooting as employee opens fire at Molson Coors brewery complex
An employee has opened fire at Milwaukee's Molson Coors brewing complex, killing five fellow workers before taking his own life, police said. The gunman was identified as a 51-year-old Milwaukee man. Police said the bloodshed was confined to the brewing facility, and that "no members of the general public were involved". Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett said it was an "unspeakable tragedy" for the city. "There were five individuals who went to work today, just like everybody goes to work, and they thought they were going to go to work, finish their day and return to their families. They didn't  and tragically they never will," he said. "It is a horrible, horrible day for the employees here. It's a very rough day for anyone who is close to this situation," he added. US President Donald Trump addressed the shooting before speaking at the White House with reporters about steps his administration is taking to combat the coronavirus.  "Our hearts break for them and their loved ones," the President said.  "We send our condolences. We'll be with them, and it's a terrible thing, a terrible thing." Wisconsin Lieutenant Governor Mandela Barnes said it was the scene of "another American tragedy". "A senseless American tragedy, and one that shouldn't have had to happen," Mr Barnes said. Authorities did not immediately release details about the shooter or how the shooting unfolded. Molson Coors CEO Gavin Hattersley called the shooter "an active brewery employee". "Unfortunately, I am devastated to share that we lost five other members of our family in this tragic incident," he said in an email sent to employees. "There are no words to express the deep sadness many of us are feeling right now." "We are all a family. We work a lot of hours together, so we're all very sad," said Selena Curka, a brewery employee who was about to start her shift when the complex went on lockdown and she was turned away. "It's just weird, because nine times out of 10 you're going to know the shooter," said employee Thomas Milner.  "It's a tight-knit family. Within the brewery, we all interact with each other." At least 600 people work at the complex, which is widely known in the Milwaukee area as "Miller Valley", a reference to the Miller Brewing Company that is now part of Molson Coors. A massive red Miller sign towers over the complex and is a well-known symbol in Milwaukee. ABC/Wires 
Government rules out recommendation by Productivity Commission to axe remote-area tax concessions
The Federal Government has swiftly rejected recommendations from the Productivity Commission to axe the special tax concession for people living in remote parts of Australia. A report from the Productivity Commission released this week said the concessions were outdated, inequitable and poorly-designed. But Assistant Treasurer Michael Sukkar quickly ruled out any changes and moved to calm fears. "Were they to be implemented, the Productivity Commission's recommendations would result in significant disruption to existing arrangements," Minister Sukkar said in a statement. "Given the challenges faced by regional Australia, including as a result of the impacts of the recent drought, bushfires and now Coronavirus, the Government will not be acting on the Productivity Commission's recommendations. "The most important thing we can do at this time is continue to provide certainty and confidence to those living in regional areas that the Government remains fully committed to supporting the growth of our regions and their continued success into the future." The report looked at the effects of the zone tax offset, remote area allowance and remote area concessions for fringe benefits tax on people and businesses in remote areas. It recommended abolishing the Zone Tax Offset (ZTO), a benefit of around $300 a year to help compensate for the higher cost of living in remote areas.  The move would save the Federal Government about $150 million a year. The commission argued that the concession was "poorly targeted" with almost half the claimants living in large cities such as Townsville, Cairns, Darwin and Mackay. If it were to be kept, it recommended limiting it to only "very remote areas".  It also wanted the government to review the Regional Area Allowance, a supplementary payment for income support recipients. But it was the proposed changes to Fringe Benefits Tax remote area concessions which generated the most angst in remote areas like the Pilbara in Western Australia. The Commission said the government was forgoing up to $390 million in tax revenue a year because employer-provided housing was exempt from Fringe Benefits Tax, and this should be reduced to only a 50 per cent concession. Queensland LNP Senator Susan McDonald said the concessions were hugely important to regional Australia and the report showed a lack of understanding of life in the bush. "The Fringe Benefits Tax concessions are crucial for businesses in remote and rural Australia who provide accommodation to employees as part of their salary packages," she said in a statement. "Without these concessions, small outback businesses will not be able to attract workers." State Labor Member for the Pilbara Kevin Michel described the report as "a kick in the guts for regional residents".  "I'm totally disappointed with the Productivity Commission report. People don't seem to understand the cost of living up here in the Pilbara. "It recognises the current zone allowances aren't working properly and the inequalities that we face living in the region need to be fixed. "But at the same time it recommends abolishing the tax rebate, rather than trying to fix these inequalities. "The Commission should actually be asking for more tax concessions for people living in the Pilbara. "Living up here is not easy." WA Regional Affairs Minister Alannah MacTiernan said the fringe benefits tax housing exemption was vital in attracting workers the region. "The Pilbara is a major generator of wealth for the entire country and the fringe benefits tax exemption is indeed one of those things that is at least helping to create some balance, and going part way to addressing the problem of fly-in fly-out [workers]," she said. Shire of East Pilbara chief executive officer, Jeremy Edwards, said the council was very disappointed in the recommendations. "If the recommendations were implemented, it would have a huge financial impact on a shire like the Shire of East Pilbara," he said "The introduction of a 50 per cent rate for FBT on housing would cost the Shire $300,000 to $400,000 a year. "For a shire like ours we have to provide employee housing to attract people to come to this region and to put FTB on top of that would be a huge cost," he said. "To attract people to the regions, you do need to incentivise.  "Having a blanket statement that people want to move to the regions for lifestyle choices is true, but for somewhere like the Shire of East Pilbara and Newman we don't have a waterfront view, and it is really difficult. "So the remote area tax concessions and some of the incentives for people to live in the area is really warranted and it's needed to keep people in the regions." Mr Edwards said he is hopeful the proposal is gone for good. "It scared us a little bit, we are still going to advocate through our local members, and also Senator Dean Smith, we've spoken to him in relation to it," he said. "So we are just going to keep the pressure on and make sure the government doesn't implement something like this. "The news was welcome, but we just hope it doesn't come back and haunt us in the future." 
Taiwan is standing up as an independent nation. But China won't make it easy
It's a vibrant democracy with a population roughly the size of Australia's, yet few Aussies could name its capital, let alone its newly re-elected female president. Fewer still have visited, despite the fact it's closer to our shores than Japan or America. By almost any measure Taiwan is a success story. Its population is highly educated and its annual GDP is greater than that of the Netherlands, Sweden or Norway. It has a strong manufacturing and electronics base  if you own an iPhone or an Xbox One, your device was made in a factory run by Foxconn, the giant Taiwanese electronics firm. Taiwan has a free and robust media environment, an extensive catalogue of national parks, a vibrant cultural sector, good food and world-class infrastructure. It also has strong progressive credentials: 42 per cent of legislators are women; six seats in the national parliament are reserved for indigenous representatives; it's the only Asian nation to have legislated same-sex marriage. On paper Taiwan reads like a model global citizen. But while it has many trading partners, it has very few international friends  at least, not ones prepared to stand beside it publicly. It's been decades since any Western leader has formally hosted a dinner for their Taiwanese counterpart, let alone arranged a joint photo opportunity. Despite it being a strategic US ally, America has no official embassy in the Taiwanese capital Taipei  nor does Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom or Germany. Taiwan is the sort of "friend" you're happy to chat with at a dimly lit party, just as long as no-one posts a photo of the two of you on Facebook. Taiwan's problem is that it lives in the shadow cast by its giant neighbour, the People's Republic of China (PRC). For decades China has run a concerted and successful diplomatic campaign to isolate and prostrate the Taiwanese nation. China holds one of the five permanent seats on the UN Security Council, giving it veto rights over all significant UN decisions. As a result, Taiwan finds itself in the unique position of being the only economically advanced, first-world country barred from membership of the United Nations and all other major international organisations. But a clear majority of Taiwanese are now demanding greater international recognition  even at the risk of turning their island into a battlefield. And there's a growing sense that China may have overplayed its hand. The Chinese Communist Party claims ownership of the island on two grounds. The first involves the ethnic make-up of the Taiwanese population. It's overwhelmingly Han  around 97 per cent. The second is based on the fact that Taiwan was once part of the Great Qing empire. In the 1950s Mao Zedong's red armies moved to conquer all lost Imperial possessions and bring them under Communist rule. That included Tibet and Xinjiang. But his troops failed to take Taiwan which, at the end of the brutal Chinese civil war, had become the last outpost of the former Nationalist government and its supporters. Ever since, Beijing has labelled Taiwan a "renegade province", ignoring the historic fact that Taiwan was never a part of the People's Republic of China and has functioned as an independent political entity for seven decades. For China's President Xi Jinping, Taiwan also represents a personal political inconvenience. "It puts the lie to the Chinese Communist Party notion that Chinese culture, Chinese civilisation, does not accord with democracy," says the American Enterprise Institute's Michael Mazza. "It acts as a potential shining light on the hill for people in China who are interested in a freer future." But why have Western countries allowed Taiwan to be isolated? In the early 1970s the governments of both Taiwan (then a dictatorship) and the PRC refused to accept each other's legitimacy. Each claimed sovereignty over both sides of the Taiwan Strait.  Eventually recognition of the PRC's size and potential military might won the day and Taipei lost its seat at the UN to its rival. But Macquarie University's Roger Lee Huang says there's another major factor at play when it comes to any attempt to formally bring Taiwan back into the international fold. "Clearly Australia is very reliant on the Chinese economy," says Dr Huang, who once worked for the Democratic Progressive Party in Taiwan. "With China being Australia's largest trading partner Australia has been very cautious with anything related to China. Taiwan clearly is one of the big issues there." After 36 years of ties, Solomon Islands ended relations with Taiwan. What did it cost Beijing to win over the Pacific nation's old friend, and what might it mean for stability in the region? And Beijing has not been reticent in making its displeasure known when any nation attempts to improve its relations with Taipei. "Taiwan and Australia were actually pretty close to creating a free-trade agreement a couple of years ago and China actively intervened and basically told Australia to stop," Dr Huang says. Dr Huang says there's also been a concerted campaign by Beijing to remove any reference to Taiwanese sovereignty from world affairs. At major sporting events, for instance, Taiwanese teams are forbidden to compete under their own name. Hence, when the Matildas recently played an Olympic qualifier against Taiwan, the Taiwanese national team was euphemistically referred to as "Chinese Taipei". In 2018 the Chinese Communist Party was also successful in forcing more than 40 international airlines, including Qantas, to change their naming protocols so that Taiwan would be identified as a Chinese territory not an independent nation. Despite the pressure, Taiwan has survived and thrived. In the third quarter of 2019, the island nation jumped ahead of both Singapore and South Korea to record an economic growth rate of 2.9 per cent. What's most apparent when visiting Taiwan is how ordinary it is  ordinary in the sense of normal, everyday, functional. Unlike in mainland China, the police and military don't maintain a high public profile. During January's national election campaign there was no obvious sense of heightened security. In fact, campaigning often had a distinctly carnival feeling to it, with candidates using loud hailers, flashing lights and music to attract attention as they drove through the streets of Taipei in open vehicles. The election marked a significant turning point in Taiwan's democratic development with a record 57 per cent of the electorate voting overwhelmingly for Tsai Ing-wen's Democratic Progressive Party, giving her a second term. In so doing, they rejected the main opposition party, the Kuomintang (KMT), which was widely seen by analysts as being far more pro-Beijing. "The KMT must convince the general public that it only engages the mainland for the purposes of creating peace, and that it would never sell out Taiwan," senior party figure Chang Ya-chung acknowledged in a radio interview after the event. Dr Tsai consistently campaigned on the need for Taiwan to be less reliant on economic relations with mainland China (its major trading partner, despite the tensions) and to broaden its trade arrangements with other Asian democracies like Japan and South Korea. Professor Frank Cheng-shan Liu, from Taiwan's National Sun Yat-Sen University, says while that proved persuasive with the electorate, voters were also influenced by the solidarity and concern they felt for the pro-democracy protestors in Hong Kong. "Taiwanese people don't ignore the market potential of mainland China, but last summer changed a lot of people's perspectives," he says. Beijing has long talked about forcing Taiwan to become part of China under a Hong Kong-style "one country, two systems" arrangement, but the heavy-handed way in which protesters were dealt with in Hong Kong made Taiwanese voters uneasy, according to Professor Liu. "The Hong Kong situation actually shrank the people's positive belief that economic opportunities [with China] are the priority," he says. January's election also confirmed the existence of a demographic shift in the way ordinary Taiwanese see themselves and their national identity. Previous generations of Taiwanese, especially those who fled the mainland in the late 1940s to escape Communist rule, still saw themselves as essentially Chinese. But young people today, says Professor Liu, now identify overwhelmingly as "Taiwanese" not Chinese. "President Tsai reflected very well the new consensus to include Taiwan in their identity," he says. "To attract the younger generation's belief that she is the protector of Taiwan." Dr Huang believes Beijing may have underestimated the intelligence and political skill of the quietly-spoken Dr Tsai, a seasoned campaigner who holds a doctorate from the London School of Economics. While Beijing regularly threatens war and accuses Taiwan's leadership of being reckless separatists, she has been measured in her criticism of Beijing. In her election night speech Dr Tsai spoke of the need to make peace, parity, democracy and dialogue the watchwords of all future Beijing-Taipei relations. "Positive cross-strait interactions founded in mutual respect are the best way to serve our peoples," she said. "All countries should consider Taiwan a partner, not an issue." In an interview with the BBC several days after the election she was specifically asked about Beijing's threat of conflict if she and her government move to declare formal independence. In her response, she turned the proposition on its head. "We don't have a need to declare ourselves an independent state," she replied.  "We are an independent country already. We have a separate identity and we're a country of our own. We deserve respect from China." China's Government has made little effort to conceal its dislike of Taiwan's President Tsai Ing-wen, and her landslide re-election is a massive blow to Xi Jinping, writes Bill Birtles. Dr Huang argues Xi Jinping's aggressive and highly-nationalistic style of politics may now be backfiring. Broadly speaking, he says, the international community has learnt not to trust the Chinese government, pointing to events in Hong Kong as well as recent concerns over the PRC's handling of the current coronavirus outbreak. "I think China might have overplayed its hand in the last couple of years," he says. And he argues this month's visit to Washington by Taiwan's vice-president elect, William Lai Ching-te, could be emblematic of a nascent shift in global sentiment. "Traditional allies and friends of Taiwan, countries that obviously share similar values, are now finally awakening again," he says. Although unofficial, Mr Lai attended various events and met with many senior political figures including the powerful Speaker of the House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi. And there are other tentative signs of a global warming toward Taiwan. In response to concerns over the spread of the coronavirus, both the prime ministers of Japan and Canada publicly voiced their support for Taiwan's inclusion in the World Health Organisation. Professor Liu believes a lot will depend on how skilfully Dr Tsai manages the growing national assertiveness of the Taiwanese people. Dr Tsai has spoken openly about the pressure she's felt from elements within her party who want her to now go further in asserting the country's sovereignty. Professor Liu worries that tensions could escalate if politicians on both sides of the Taiwan Strait can't compromise. But Dr Huang doubts Beijing wants war. "The party's main concern remains political stability in China," he says. "If the People's Liberation Army can't deliver a decisive, quick victory this will most likely weaken the CCP's legitimacy within China." In the US, both sides of politics have reaffirmed their commitment to ensuring the Taiwanese military is well armed and prepared for any possible Chinese incursion. How the wider international community would respond to cross-strait conflict remains unclear. The Chinese military has tested waters in recent months by sending a jet fighter briefly into Taiwanese airspace and by undertaking two separate naval convoys through the Taiwan Strait. But it's worth noting that for all her talk of peace, Dr Tsai has been unequivocal in stating her administration's attitude to war. "Invading Taiwan is something that will be very costly for China," she told the BBC. "Maintaining a 'status quo' remains our policy. I think that is a very friendly gesture to China." Get more stories that go beyond the news cycle with our weekly newsletter. 
Tesla criticised for lack of Autopilot safeguards after Apple engineer playing on phone dies
Tesla's Autopilot driving system steered an electric vehicle into a concrete barrier on a California freeway in a fatal 2018 crash because it was operating under conditions it could not handle, a US investigation has found. The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) also ruled that the car's driver, an engineer for Apple, was distracted by playing a game on his iPhone. The NTSB made the findings on Tuesday and provided nine recommendations to prevent crashes of partially automated vehicles in the future.  Among them was that technology companies design smartphones so they do not operate if they are within a driver's reach, apart from cases of emergency. The hearing in Washington DC focused on the March 2018 crash of a Tesla Model X SUV that killed engineer Walter Huang. The 38-year-old was playing a game on his iPhone rather than holding the steering wheel. Autopilot was engaged when the vehicle swerved and slammed into a concrete barrier dividing freeway and exit lanes at a speed of 113 kilometres per hour. Drivers can avoid holding the steering wheel for extended periods while using Autopilot, but Tesla recommends keeping hands on the wheel and paying attention. The board criticised Tesla in its findings, saying that if it did not add driver-monitoring safeguards, misuse of Autopilot was expected "and the risk for future crashes will remain". The NTSB can only make recommendations, while the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) regulates US vehicles. It said it would carefully review the recommendations. The NHTSA has opened investigations into 14 Tesla crashes in which Autopilot is suspected of being in use, but has taken no action against the company. "It's time to stop enabling drivers in any partially automated vehicle to pretend that they have driverless cars. Because they don't have driverless cars," NTSB chairman Robert Sumwalt said. According to the NTSB, regulators place limitations on Autopilot use in Europe where Tesla issues alerts for hands-off driving within 15 seconds. Tesla, whose Autopilot has been tied to at least three fatal crashes since 2016, did not respond to requests for comment. The company has previously said the system was put out initially in "beta," meaning it was being tested and improved as bugs were identified, the NTSB was told. Mr Sumwalt said Tesla  unlike five other car manufacturers  had ignored NTSB safety recommendations issued in 2017. The NTSB said it would soon release a review of a Tesla Autopilot fatal crash in March 2019 in Florida that showed no evidence the driver's hands were on the steering wheel in the final eight seconds before the car struck a truck. Mr Sumwalt added that the problem of driver distraction due to smartphones would keep spreading if nothing was done.  "If we don't get on top of it, it's going to be a coronavirus," Mr Sumwalt said. AP/Reuters 
Underemployment in Australia is on the rise and it may only get worse, experts say
Desiree Sheets-Chavolla works as a cleaner at Sydney Airport. She currently does an average of 26 hours a week but would like to work more. "I'm constantly having to ask for extra work," she told 7.30. "They've created like a shark tank for us  we have to fight for any overtime." Ms Sheets-Chavolla is not alone. Exclusive market research for 7.30 shows almost 1.2 million people were underemployed last year and the problem is only predicted to get worse. Roy Morgan Research analysed 15 years of research and found the number of underemployed people had jumped almost 450,000 since 2005. The research is based on thousands of face-to-face interviews conducted across the country each month. CEO Michele Levine said an increasing number of workers were frustrated about being trapped in part-time work. "Essentially what they're saying is they've got a part-time job, but they would really like to be working more hours," she told 7.30. "Part-time jobs are growing at a faster rate than full-time jobs. And clearly, when you have part-time jobs, you have a lot of those people would prefer to have more work, they'd prefer to have a full-time job." According to the Roy Morgan research, 8.7 per cent of the workforce is underemployed, slightly higher than the Australian Bureau of Statistics' (ABS) official figure of 8.5 per cent. And you are more likely to be underemployed if you are a woman, a worker in your teens or 20s, or you work in three industries where part-time work is common. The recreation and personal sector, which includes hospitality and fitness workers, is the industry with the highest underemployment, at 20 per cent, followed closely by retail with over 19 per cent underemployment, and community services, which includes teachers and carers, at 10.5 per cent. For Ms Sheets-Chavolla, the lack of work makes it difficult to make ends meet. "I struggle to pay my bills, I struggle to pay my mortgage," she said. That means she puts off fixing essentials like her broken hot water heater which is leaking water. Despite a 50-kilometre commute to the airport for shifts as short as four hours, Ms Sheets-Chavolla has taken on a second cleaning job but says it isn't enough to fill the financial shortfall. "It doesn't come easy because you're always robbing from Peter to pay Paul and you're always waiting for that next payday and its very stressful," she said. Roy Morgan's Ms Levine said the economy would benefit from people having extra work if they wanted it. "We're under-utilising the potential of our people to be doing meaningful work," she said. "That in itself is a bad thing, that holds the economy back. "If more people were actually working and working as many hours as they wanted to, they'd have more money to spend, and that of course, feeds the economy." The ABS uses a strict definition to calculate its unemployment and underemployment statistics so that it can compare Australia's results with that of other countries. A person is counted as being employed if they work one hour a week. Ndonde Fikiri enjoys her part-time in retail but she wants to work more. Her shifts can be as short as three hours. "A three-hour shift, that's like barely $50," she told 7.30. "Sometimes it takes about $6 to go and come back from work. It's just not enough." She has been going door-to-door to retail outlets, handing out her resume in a search for more work. She's not having much luck. "Only one of the retailers accepted my resume," she said. "[The search] continues." Ms Fikiri is trying to save enough to pay for a business degree at university. "I have to pay for my own uni, and I just can't sit around and wait, getting three-hour shifts per day." "How am I ever going to pay $4,000 a semester? I need a job." According to Jeff Borland, a professor of economics at the University of Melbourne, there has been a significant shift to part-time work over decades, which is causing the spike in underemployment. "Underemployment really is a part-time work phenomenon," he told 7.30. "Back in the mid-1960s, for example, only about 10 per cent of jobs were part-time then and the rate of underemployment was 1 per cent. "So, only one in 100 workers in the labour force then said that they were underemployed. "Nowadays with part-time employment, it's about a third of the labour force." He said even the well-educated were finding it harder to land full-time work. "Whereas 10-15 years ago, if you had a degree and wanted a full-time job, you're pretty likely to get that straight away, now it's about a quarter of people who get a graduate degree, three months after they graduate are doing part-time work, and it's taking them several years to get the full-time job they want." Professor Borland predicts underemployment is likely to get worse, particularly after hits to the economy from this summer's bushfire and the coronavirus outbreak. He said the Morrison Government should look at budget stimulus to try and combat the issue. "The signs are that part-time employment will continue to grow," he said. "If you extrapolate past trends and taking account of the likelihood of some weakening in the Australian economy, it is quite likely that underemployment will continue to rise." For airport worker Desiree Sheets-Chavolla, underemployment is a worrying trend that makes her worry about the future for her children. "It's grim. You know, it's sad to see that that's where this world is going," she said. "We want to make it better in the future. "We want people to have full-time jobs and it's just not going that way." 
China jails Hong Kong bookseller Gui Minhai for 10 years in case which has caused diplomatic rift with Sweden
A Chinese court has sentenced Chinese-born Swedish citizen Gui Minhai to 10 years in jail for illegally providing intelligence overseas, prompting a protest from Stockholm. Gui, a bookseller previously based in Hong Kong who sold books critical of China's political leadership, was detained by mainland police in 2018.  He was seized while with Swedish diplomats on a Beijing-bound train. Relations between Sweden and China soured in the months leading up to the sentencing, with Chinese officials warning Swedish counterparts against meddling in China's internal affairs. Sweden summoned the Chinese ambassador to Stockholm to protest against the sentence and demand Gui's release. "We have summoned China's ambassador to our cabinet secretary and again demanded the release of, and consular access to, our citizen," a foreign ministry spokesman told Reuters. Swedish Foreign Minister Ann Linde said Gui should be released, a position Sweden has held throughout. "We also require access to our citizen to provide the consular support he is entitled to," Ms Linde said. "We have not had access to or knowledge of any trial. Thus, we have not been able to review the indictment nor been able to offer access to legal counsel," she said. A statement by the Ningbo Intermediate People's Court, which jailed Gui, said the 55-year-old had stated that he would not appeal the sentence and had asked to have his Chinese citizenship reinstated. A spokesman for China's foreign ministry told a news briefing that Gui's rights and interests had been fully guaranteed. He said consular visits, in general, were put on hold due to the coronavirus outbreak. Chinese officials objected to Svenska PEN, a literary organisation, awarding Gui the 2019 Tucholsky Prize, praising his services to free speech. The complicated conflict broken down in simple terms to help you get a handle on what's going on  Swedish Culture Minister Amanda Lind defied Chinese diplomatic threats of "countermeasures" to present the prize. Gui is the highest-profile of five booksellers who disappeared between October and December 2015, all linked to a Hong Kong bookshop known for its gossipy texts on Chinese political leaders. Such books are banned on the mainland but their production and sale are legal in Hong Kong under freedoms guaranteed as part of the 1997 handover from British colonial rule to Chinese sovereignty. Gui was initially abducted in the Thai beach resort of Pattaya in 2015 before surfacing, like the others, in detention in mainland China.  He was released in October 2017, before being arrested in January 2018. Three of his colleagues were detained in mainland China while another was widely thought to have been abducted in Hong Kong and spirited across the border. Gui is the only one to have remained in detention. His daughter Angela, along with other supporters, has repeatedly called for his release, saying he is a victim of illegal political persecution.  Reuters 
Greta Thunberg says EU is 'pretending' to tackle climate change crisis
Climate activist Greta Thunberg has accused European Union governments and institutions of only "pretending" to urgently tackle the climate crisis. EU leaders say they are spearheading some of the most ambitious climate change policies in the world, and on Wednesday the bloc's executive unveiled a planned climate law to reduce net greenhouse gas emissions to zero by 2050. "When your house is on fire, you don't wait a few more years to start putting it out," Ms Thunberg told the European Parliament's environment committee. "And yet this is what the [European] Commission is proposing today." The 17-year-old Swedish activist said that, by fixing its climate law around an emissions target three decades in the future, the EU was ignoring reality. Greta Thunberg inspired a global movement for climate action, but some haven't welcomed her message. "Here you are, trying to create laws and policies once again ignoring it. Pretending that your plan or policy disregarding the united science will somehow solve the biggest crisis humanity has ever faced," she said. "Pretending that a law that no one has to follow  is a law. Pretending that you can be a climate leader and still go on building and subsidising new fossil fuel infrastructure," Ms Thunberg said, drawing applause from European lawmakers. The climate law would give the executive Commission powers to set tougher goals for governments every five years. But these powers would only kick in after 2030  too late, according to environment groups. "We will not be satisfied with anything less than a science-based pathway which gives us the best possible chance to safeguard the future living conditions for humanity and life on earth as we know it," Ms Thunberg said. The EU accounts for less than 10 per cent of the world's greenhouse gas emissions. But Ms Thunberg said the bloc had a moral obligation to lead the way, because developed economies that have been polluting for longest should cut emissions first and fastest. The European Parliament has banned external visitors for the next three weeks as a precaution against the fast-spreading coronavirus, but waived its own rule for Ms Thunberg's visit. Ms Thunberg is in Brussels this week to meet EU leaders and lead a climate school strike on Friday. "For over one-and-a-half years we have been sacrificing our education to protest against your inaction," Ms Thunberg said. She began missing school in 2018 to sit outside the Swedish parliament in a solitary protest. Since then, Ms Thunberg has galvanised a global movement of young people, inspiring millions to take to the streets to demand that world leaders act urgently to tackle the climate crisis. Reuters/AP 
There is a chance today's GDP number could signal Australia is already in recession
Australia's economy is facing some of its biggest threats in a generation. This time last year the economy was already struggling. Business activity outside the mining sector was sluggish at best and shoppers were reluctant to spend at the stores. Years of low wage growth, high levels of personal debt and job insecurity were already taking a toll. Fast forward to the end of the year and add to that a severe drought, a disastrous bushfire season and rising unemployment, and you have an economy slowing down to a worryingly low pace. That's why when the threat of a pandemic hit global headlines, share markets sold off  companies looking for higher profits in a sluggish economy were forced to completely overhaul their earnings guidance. Today's GDP data won't factor in the threat of the spread of the coronavirus and its impact on business and the economy, but it will highlight how vulnerable the economy was late last year before it was hit with the threat of a pandemic. Let's look at some of the key components of GDP leading into today's national accounts release. Australia relies heavily on international trade for economic growth. According to the Bureau of Statistics, the current account surplus, seasonally adjusted, fell by 85 per cent to $955 million in the December quarter 2019. This shows Australia's trade position deteriorated materially towards the end of last year. NAB's chief economist Alan Oster told the ABC's PM program this was a "reflection of lower commodities prices and lower demand for exports". Net exports and government spending were both expected to contribute less than expected to GDP in the December quarter, said AMP Capital's chief economist Shane Oliver. "Net exports and public demand [government spending] are each expected to contribute a smaller-than-expected 0.1 percentage points to December quarter GDP growth," he said. Shoppers and consumer spending generate the bulk of economic growth. But Australian retail turnover fell 0.5 percentage points in December 2019. This follows a rise of 1 per cent in November 2019, said Ben James, the director of Quarterly Economy Wide Surveys at the ABS. "The December fall comes after a strong November, led by Black Friday sales," he said. The outlook for the first quarter of this year, according to economists, is for more tight purse strings. Spending by businesses has also been lacklustre. Businesses spending on equipment, plant and machinery rose 0.8 per cent in the December quarter. Spending on new factories and building was quite poor though, down 5.9 per cent. Businesses remain reluctant to spend and certainly do not possess the "animal spirits" the Reserve Bank governor, Philip Lowe said he wants to see. Ahead of the GDP announcement, three of Australia's leading economists shared their views on where the economy was heading. Mr Oster said the December quarter would see "moderate growth, but not great". He expected GDP growth to come in at a very modest 0.3 percentage points. He said the economy should start to improve by April but "all our data suggests that things are getting worse". NAB said there was now an increased chance of a recession in 2020. However, Mr Oliver was more pessimistic. "We have revised down our December quarter GDP growth forecast to zero or 1.6 per cent year on year (from plus 0.3 quarter on quarter)," he wrote in a note. "There is a risk that it could be negative, even before the bushfires and coronavirus likely knocked the economy backwards in the current quarter." This would mean, assuming the current quarter sees a contraction in economic growth, that Australia's economy is currently in recession. A technical recession is defined as two consecutive quarters of negative GDP growth. Chances of a recession were increasing, according to BIS Oxford Economics chief economist Sarah Hunter. "Definitely much higher now than they were two weeks ago," she said. "The probability of a recession this year is definitely higher and increasing as the [coronavirus] outbreak spreads to more parts of the world and doesn't show any signs of slowing." 
Spotlight to buy collapsed retail chain Harris Scarfe
Collapsed department store chain Harris Scarfe has found a buyer in the Spotlight Group, but the future of its remaining stores and staff remains unclear. The 170-year-old retailer called in the administrators in December, just a month after it was acquired by private equity firm Allegro Funds. The number of Harris Scarfe stores has been reduced from 66 to 44 in the months since, and job cuts reduced employee numbers from more than 1,800 to around 1,300. The coronavirus outbreak is expected to cost the Australian economy billions, with the second-order impact to be felt across supply chains, as many factories remain closed in China. Receivers from Deloitte Restructuring Services have granted the Spotlight group exclusive rights to buy the business, after four parties were shortlisted. The Spotlight Group runs the eponymous chain of fabric and craft stores, as well as camping and outdoor brands Mountain Designs and Anaconda. The receivers said they were "seeking to secure the ongoing employment" of the remaining staff members. "We are hopeful all of the 44 stores will be retained under the sale but ultimately, this will be dependent on how the transaction progresses over the next couple of weeks," receiver Vaughan Strawbridge said. Harris Scarfe is one of a growing list of retail casualties in recent months, including accessories brand Colette and clothing chains Jeanswest and Bardot, which all shut down some of their stores after entering administration. After closing a quarter of its stores and making more than 260 employees redundant, Jeanswest was last week sold to Harbour Guidance, the subsidiary of a Hong Kong company run by the same family that previously owned it. The already-struggling retail sector has had a tough start to the year, with a horror bushfire season impacting domestic travel and spending in fire-affected areas and the coronavirus outbreak disrupting supply chains. The latest ANZ-Roy Morgan survey showed consumer confidence fell 3.2 per cent last week, to be at its lowest in more than five years. "The virus-induced sell-off in the local and global stock markets and the big drop in [Chinese manufacturing] likely contributed to the weakness," ANZ's head of Australian economics David Plank said. Respondents' views of current economic conditions dropped sharply, by more than 16 per cent, but there was more positivity around personal finances. "So far the negative economic outlook has been a better guide to household spending than more positive financial sentiment," Mr Plank said. The receivers for Harris Scarfe said they expected to finalise the sale to Spotlight as early as mid-April. 
Olympic champion Mo Farah faces renewed doping suspicions following British TV investigation
As the coronavirus works its way across the globe, the possibility that the Olympics will be postponed for the first time since World War II seems real. Meanwhile, a more routine spectre hovers over the five-ringed circus  the notion that some of the greatest performances produced on the grand Olympic stage are not real. Even before the 1988 Seoul Games  where Ben Johnson was so juiced up his eyes leaked stanozolol when he watched a sad movie  we were accustomed to the possibility the highest-profile Olympic performances were a pharmaceutical hoax. From the bearded female shot putters of the Cold War era to the more recent disgrace of countries such as Russia, we have been conditioned to the notion of systematic cheating  especially when it came from the other side of the geopolitical fence. But now, more often, we see but do not quite believe even some of the most romantic tales from the Olympics. There was no more heart-warming moment at the 2012 London Olympics than when Mo Farah celebrated his victories in the 5,000 metres and 10,000 metres before a euphoric crowd with his endearing Mobot gesture. As Cathy Freeman celebrated her Indigenous Australian heritage in Sydney 12 years earlier and allowed us to share her pride, Farah symbolised the joys of Britain's multicultural society against the rising tide of the navel-gazing nationalism that would soon deliver Brexit. To be in London's Olympic stadium when Farah twice breasted the tape was to see Great Britain briefly united in purpose and celebration. Which is why the suspicion surrounding Farah since his long-time coach Alberto Salazar was suspended for four years for "orchestrating and facilitating prohibited doping", creates such trepidation. The BBC's investigative program Panorama aired an episode titled "Mo Farah and the Salazar Scandal" earlier this week, which included admissions that the four-time Olympic gold medallist Farah used a performance-enhancing substance, although not necessarily in banned quantities. The crux of the accusation against Farah is that he was injected with L-carnitine before the 2014 London Marathon on Salazar's instructions. L-carnitine is a naturally occurring amino acid that the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) has banned in dosages of more than 50ml in the space of six hours. There has been no accusation made or evidence produced that Farah used more L-carnitine than is allowed before the London Marathon or any other event. But Farah's initial denial he used the substance and the circumstances surrounding its administration arouse suspicion. Farah's case came to light during the United States Anti-Doping Agency's (USADA) investigation into Salazar, the head of the Nike Oregon Project where Farah trained throughout his two successful Olympic campaigns. Since Salazar's conviction the British champion has suffered guilt by association, unfairly so in some eyes given there has been no evidence his four Olympic gold medals are tainted. But it has now been revealed that during a five-hour interview with USADA in London, Farah repeatedly denied using L-Carnitine before the London Marathon, only to change his story after a conversation with UK Athletics head of endurance Barry Fudge minutes after leaving the interview room. Fudge, it transpired, had travelled to Switzerland on Salazar's instructions to collect L-carnitine from the coach's supplier, an extremely unusual task for a British coach that had not been disclosed in previous enquiries. Last year, Farah strongly criticised the media, who he claimed was unfairly destroying his reputation because of his association with Salazar. But while none of the dots assembled by Panorama condemned Farah, when they are put together they create  at best  some confusion around Farah's credibility. Farah's lawyers have issued a statement in which they claim he was "one of the most tested athletes in the UK, if not the world" and that "interviews are not memory tests". But the Lance Armstrong case has diminished the "I've been tested hundreds of times" defence, given that investigation  rather than the testing often successfully dodged by many drug cheats  is now the most common means of nailing high-profile dopers. To some in British track and field, Farah already stands accused of breaching the "spirit of the sport" by his use of L-carnitine. The distance star's defenders might quite understandably respond that athletes who are being asked to follow both the literal WADA guideline around the use of supplements and this more ethereal "spirit of sport" code, are intolerably burdened. But, sadly, we live in an age where the innocence of sport has been lost. A time symbolised by the millions of now long-discarded yellow Livestrong wristbands and the hatches constructed in the Russian laboratories from which tainted drug samples were smuggled. This does not justify a rush to judgement of those such as Farah, who is so far accused only of using an amino acid that is legal in small quantities. On the contrary, Farah's case should for now remind us to be careful that the natural scepticism created by so many fallen heroes is not overtaken by the wilful blindness of outright cynicism. We must also avoid blind parochialism. The cloud hovering over some of British sport's most meritorious and raucously celebrated sporting achievements, including those of its storied cyclists, might seem ironic to those Australians who heard the chants of the English crowds during the last Ashes series  "Same old Aussies, always cheating". But in modern sport, if you throw the doping stone, you can very quickly find yourself in a glasshouse. 
Sydney train network in chaos, major delays on several lines after derailment 
Sydney's train network was thrown into chaos this morning with major delays on several lines after a work car derailed near Circular Quay. Workers in a ute, which had been modified to drive on the rails, were inspecting the track early this morning when the vehicle derailed on the City Circle line between Circular Quay and Wynyard. "It slipped off the rail, it jammed itself and it took our emergency crews to jack it up," Sydney Trains boss Stewart Mills said. The maintenance vehicle was removed about 7:18am and services resumed on the City Circle shortly after. Mr Mills said about 130 services were impacted, but very few were cancelled. Since then, he said, it had been a "complicated recovery". The worst-affected services were for commuters travelling from Western Sydney, the north shore and the airport. Impacted lines included the T2 Inner West and Leppington, T3 Bankstown and T8 Airport and South Line. Even after the morning rush, delays were still being felt, with trains between Circular Quay and Parramatta arriving up to 75 minutes late. Sydney Trains expects trains to be running to timetable for the afternoon commute. Frustrated commuters took to social media to vent about the delays. "Left my house at 6am. Start work in 4 mins at 8 and I'm not even close to getting there any time soon. Just another day on Sydney Trains," one person tweeted. Sydney's train system relies significantly on the City Circle, and incidents there can have massive flow-on effects on lines elsewhere. Mr Mills apologised for the delays, describing a string of recent disruptions as "unprecedented". "We've had some really difficult, exceptional circumstances over the last month," he said. "Whether it's exceptional record heat, to the storms, that is just unprecedented over the network." The price of ride share apps surged amid the chaos, with one commuter travelling 9km from Petersham to Martin Place claiming they were quoted a fare of $85. In a tweet, Sydney Trains encouraged commuters to consider using the city's light rail lines, which run between Dulwich Hill in the inner west, Randwick in the eastern suburbs, and Central. One passenger replied: "Looking forward to that light rail service in Riverwood. How long is it going to take to get here?" Mr Mills said no-one was injured during the derailment incident. There were also delays on the North Shore's line after a trespasser disrupted services at Central earlier this morning. 
Healthcare costs in the United States can leave Americans in debt, in court and living on the brink
Zann Nelson was having lunch with a friend when she suddenly started bleeding. In the bathroom, it looked like a heavy period, which made no sense, given she had not menstruated in a decade. Panic began bubbling up inside her as she rushed to see a doctor. Not only was she suddenly grappling with her own mortality, Zann was also terrified about what it could cost. Like millions of other Americans, she had no health insurance and in the land of the free there is only a very limited safety net. Medical bills are a big contributor to personal bankruptcy cases. "Before I was diagnosed, they handed me a little piece of paper to sign," Zann said. "The surgeon told me, 'don't worry about the money, we need to focus on your health,' and I thought, OK great, they're going to help me."  The diagnosis was uterine cancer and the surgeon's solution was a radical hysterectomy to remove Zann's uterus before the growth spread. The operation was a success. But within weeks, a series of bills began appearing in the mail  some from imaging, some from doctors and some from the hospital itself. The total cost of $45,000 was far more than Zann could afford, even on a monthly payment plan. She was sued by the local health system and fought back in court, but ultimately lost the case. The hospital put a claim on her family farm where Zann had lived most of her life, and she had to sell land to pay back the debt. "My case all came down to that little piece of paper with tiny writing, which was a contract," she said. "They denied not telling me about the cost and saying the things they did. The judge actually stated that I could have chosen to refuse the surgery." Stories like Zann's are a big reason healthcare is the top issue for many voters in this US election year. In 2019, one study found about 137 million Americans had faced some sort of financial stress due to medical costs.  The price of insurance has dominated debates between the Democrats vying to become Donald Trump's opponent in November. Even those with coverage who work full time are not immune from crippling, surprise bills. Amanda Sturgill is still thousands of dollars in debt due to co-payments from her teenage daughter's back surgery four years ago. "My daughter Makayla was getting my youngest child out of the bath and suddenly she had the worst pain she'd ever felt in her life," Amanda said. After various tests, doctors finally diagnosed Makayla with degenerative disc disease and recommended an operation. Amanda earns about $18 an hour and because she was insured through her employer, assumed she would be OK. But she was not prepared for all the out-of-pocket costs, and after falling behind, a sheriff turned up at her house with a court summons.  She was being sued for about $3,800. Amanda is currently going through a divorce and raising four children. Due to her debt payment plan and her daughter's ongoing treatment costs, there are weeks when she struggles to make ends meet. "It's very stressful. I ration medication. I've sold every piece of jewellery that I have. I have nothing left," Amanda said. "A lot of times, I'll go all day long and I won't eat, I save food for the kids." In a last-ditch effort to turn their financial situation around, some Americans file for bankruptcy. The precise number of medical bankruptcies is hotly disputed because people usually have multiple financial issues when they file, but lawyers say healthcare costs are a common factor. "About half of my cases each month have medical bills as a large factor. Usually those clients don't have health insurance or they have bad health insurance," bankruptcy lawyer Marshall Slayton said.  Mr Slayton said more Americans appeared to be forgoing health insurance altogether. "What you see is people take a risk. They say it's more important for me to put food on the table and have a car  than have health insurance," he said. "For some people, the gamble works out and for some people, it doesn't."  Academics have long warned the high price of care can have social consequences too. Right now, as authorities work to prevent the spread of the deadly coronavirus around the United States, there are concerns some uninsured people with mild cases may not seek treatment, due to the potential cost. The Miami Herald reported that one man who developed symptoms after returning from China in January could now owe thousands, after getting tested for coronavirus in hospital and being diagnosed with just the flu. All the Democrats trying to win the party's presidential nomination have put forward plans to reduce the risk of surprise medical bills. Former vice-president Joe Biden wants to expand the existing Affordable Care Act  which is also known as Obamacare  to include more Americans, further subsidise insurance premiums and drive down the cost of medicine. But current frontrunner Bernie Sanders is promising a universal, publicly funded Medicare For All insurance program that would cover all US residents with virtually no out-of-pocket costs. It would be a more generous health system than Australia's, even including free dental coverage. It would also reduce the number of uninsured Americans from about 8.8 per cent to nearly zero. Although the total price and net impact on national health expenditure are currently being ferociously debated, many forecasters predict it would cost the US Government roughly $46 trillion over a decade. "That's a reasonable middle estimate in a big range," said Marc Goldwein from the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, a Washington DC-based thinktank. "To put that in context, you'd have to double all income taxes or essentially double the national debt to pay for that." Some Democrats fear campaigning on Medicare For All at a general election could be politically tricky and it seemingly has little chance of getting through Congress unchanged. The healthcare industry is incredibly influential and for Americans with good insurance, the quality of care they receive is world class. "America currently attracts the best and brightest doctors and specialists from around the world because they earn very good wages," said Ge Bai from Johns Hopkins Carey Business School. "Research and medical discoveries here save lives everywhere and some in the industry fear Medicare for All could slow that innovation." But both Zann Nelson and Amanda Sturgill say something has to change in the coming years to ensure fewer people end up in their situation. Zann is a lifelong Democrat and is hoping a moderate like Joe Biden will win the White House this year. "You just have to look around the world to know that our health system does not make sense," she said at her farm north of Charlottesville. "It's a human right to be healthy and I think we should work on improving Obamacare." Amanda is likely to back self-described Democratic socialist Bernie Sanders, largely because of his Medicare For All plan. She even recently decided to appear in advertisements promoting the policy. Her family lives in a former coal mining area, near the border of Virginia, Tennessee and Kentucky, a region that is pro-Donald Trump. "I voted for [Republican President] George W Bush. I change my vote," she said. "People here hate Democrats but I think they hate Bernie Sanders a bit less. He thinks about working Americans." 
Australian Van Kham Chau loses appeal in Vietnam against 'terrorism' charges
Sydney retiree Van Kham Chau has lost his final appeal against his 12-year jail sentence in Vietnam on terrorism charges. Chau, 70, has been in jail for more than a year, after being found guilty of terrorist activities in what human rights groups have described as a sham trial against a political prisoner. The retired baker is a member of the human rights organisation Viet Tan, which the Vietnamese Government says is a terrorist organisation. In his final remarks during the appeal, Chau said although he was an Australian citizen, he had never forgotten his Vietnamese roots, and he had no reason to join a reactionary terrorist group that would act against the Vietnamese people.  "I love my homeland Vietnam and my people  I want my country to grow, the people [to] live with freedom and democracy," he said.  "I have never [done] anything to harm my people, even my captors who detained me. "I admit that I have made [a] mistake and admit my fault in entering Vietnam's territory with [the] identity card of another person. But during my short stay in Vietnam, I only had normal activities, nothing was terrorist."  Van Kham Chau, who fled Vietnam after the war, was investigated for a crime that carries the death penalty. Here's how his case unfolded. The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) said it was disappointed in the outcome and would continue to provide consular assistance to Chau and his family, including monitoring his health and wellbeing. "We are disappointed that Mr Chau's appeal has been unsuccessful. This marks the conclusion of his legal process," DFAT said in a statement to the ABC. "Vietnamese authorities understand our strong interest in his health and welfare. Australian officials have raised Mr Chau's case and will continue to do so. "We are concerned about the length of Mr Chau's sentence, particularly given his health and welfare may be severely impacted by serving such a sentence at his age." Elaine Pearson from Human Rights Watch said Chau and his two co-defendants, Tran Van Quyen and Nguyen Van Vien were convicted due to their affiliation with Viet Tan, "which has explicitly rejected violence but supports democracy and political participation in Vietnam". "They are the latest victims in a spiralling crackdown on dissent and free speech within Vietnam  they are among hundreds of political prisoners who are currently detained." She called on Minister for Foreign Affairs Marise Payne to speak out about Chau's case, saying it raised many concerns about due process. "The Australian Government should redouble its efforts to press strongly for Chau's return to Australia. On some occasions, Vietnam has allowed political prisoners to be released into exile in Europe or the US but that will only happen if there is strong pressure from the Australian Government," she said. Chau was arrested in Ho Chi Minh City in January last year while meeting an activist from the Brotherhood for Democracy group and he was accused of entering the country through Cambodia on false documents. In November, he was sentenced to 12 years in prison after being convicted for holding a senior position in the New South Wales chapter of Viet Tan and for "financing terrorism". His wife, Trang Chau, told the ABC she was upset by the court's decision.  "I'm very sad," she said, adding her family and community deeply missed him after he had spent more than a year in prison. "I hope the Government can help us to get him back in Australia, because I am very scared." She stressed her husband "did not do something wrong, only [advocated for] human rights". "My husband is not a terrorist. He is a good man who wanted to do something for Vietnam," she said.  Chau's lawyer, Trinh Vinh Phuc, told the ABC he could still request a review of the judgement and a retrial, but said it was a long process for political cases like Chau's and the chances of success were close to zero. Chau's sister, who lives in Vietnam, was not permitted to observe the courtroom proceedings.  Cardiologist and fellow Viet Tan member Phong Nguyen said he hoped the rejection of Chau's appeal would open up a path for negotiation between the Australian and Vietnamese governments. "Mr Chau is of no use to them anymore  they sentenced him, [which] serves the purpose of basically instilling fear in anyone who speaks against the Government. That's a very harsh sentence," Dr Nguyen said.  "We detest the sentence, because there is no evidence of anything  that could be labelled as terrorism or financing terrorism. "We don't believe this is the end. This is a time when bilateral talks need to be increased, particularly on compassionate grounds  he is elderly and he has got illnesses." Australian consulate officials were unable to visit Chau in the past month due to COVID-19 but were able to observe his appeal proceedings on Monday. They were both arrested in the same week by communist regimes. But Australia's reaction to the cases of Yang Hengjun and Van Kham Chau couldn't be more different. The detention centre where Chau is being held in Ho Chi Minh City cancelled all consular visits for the month of February, and non-consular visits were being approved on a case-by-case basis.  Vietnam has recorded 16 cases of the novel coronavirus, but there have been no deaths and all patients have recovered, according to the Johns Hopkins University map tracking the spread of the outbreak.  Chau's lawyer Mr Phuc listed a number of health concerns Chau faced in prison, including prostate problems, recurring vertigo, severe back pain and high blood pressure.  Chau has also been hospitalised at least twice since his arrest. His son Daniel told the ABC his family were hoping to try and visit Chau in prison in the coming months. [It's taken a toll] on Mum especially," he said, adding that the emotional side of the case was on his mind daily.  "If I could speak to my dad, I'd wish him good luck, I hope he's OK. It's hard. I'm really concerned about his health. "I just want him home." After Chau's arrest and incarceration, Chau's youngest son, Dennis, became something of an accidental activist, highlighting his father's plight at the 12th Geneva Summit on Human Rights and Democracy last fortnight.  Dennis, who is based in the UK, said his father was held in a cell for 23 hours a day, with one hour of exercise permitted.  "His mental health is deteriorating," Dennis said. "We've made requests for family visitation, none of which have been granted." "My father turned 70 last year, and so with a 12-year sentence, he'll be 82 when he is released. It is effectively a death sentence." Dennis said his father went back to Vietnam out of a sense injustice and to advocate for the rights of people in his homeland, which he fled as a refugee in the early 1980s. "My father isn't a fool, he would've known of the dangers of returning to Vietnam, but he went anyway," he said.  "My father came to Australia with nothing but the clothes on his back as a refugee after the Vietnam War. He worked hard all his life to make something for him and his family in his new adopted home.  "He grew to be a proud Australian, proud of the freedoms we take for granted." Dennis went on to say that his father "felt for the people of Vietnam" who were deprived of the same freedoms.  "This is why he felt compelled to advocate and effect change," he said.  He called on Prime Minister Scott Morrison and the Australian Government to act.  "The Australian Government must be held to a higher standard, as a western democracy, to not put trade relations above basic human rights  the ones that we hold so dear," he said.  "As trading partners of Vietnam, you are also accountable for the treatment of its people  when you sign that trade agreement. "I'll be unwavering in my mission to keep my father's voice and story alive. "It is silence that breeds inaction. It is silence that lets these governments know that it is OK to continue with their ways." 
The human race is not special. So why do we think we're immune to mass extinction?
Could we face a mass extinction of human beings in our lifetime?    As global temperatures rise and this summer's bushfires devastate the Australian landscape, it's a worst-case scenario that is beginning to be seriously discussed. The rapid spread of the coronavirus in recent weeks has also escalated the anxiety that people feel about their mortality.   However, there seems to be a difference in the way the public has reacted to these two threats. Global warming and potential mass extinction are seen as a vague threat somewhere out there in the distant future, whereas coronavirus is viewed as a clear and imminent danger. The growing fear of a coronavirus pandemic appears to have quickly motivated Australian health authorities and governments into immediate and appropriate action. By comparison, the anxiety around global warming and potential mass extinction seems muted. Things came to a head at dinner one night earlier this year, when my girlfriend suggested the chat was too depressing. She believed in climate change, she just didn't see the point of being so negative. A report written by Paul Gilding, a fellow at the University of Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership, and commissioned by the Breakthrough National Centre for Climate Restoration, put forward the view that there is a "high likelihood of human civilisation coming to an end in 2050" if action is not taken to curb climate change. Climate change deniers will typically denounce any discussion of mass extinction as histrionic doomsday talk, while some climate change believers argue that discussing mass extinction now is precipitous and dampens the optimism that we can turn global warming around with a positive "can-do" spirit. Who would have thought that both camps have a psychological mindset in common?  A naive optimism that human beings are just so clever that it will all turn out OK.   Psychoanalysts use the term manic defence to describe how human beings can pathologically cling to optimism and hope as a way of denying their depression and anxiety.   To contemplate mass extinction is indeed a dark place to go to and a difficult conversation to have  even more difficult than global warming itself  because it is to think the unthinkable.  Scientists suspect we are on the cusp of a sixth mass extinction. So how much could human activities be driving the process this time? But spiritual traditions across the world believe it brings depth and richness to our lives to contemplate our own death. It does not necessarily have to be a morbid preoccupation. It is sobering to consider what scientists tell us of the paleo-ontological history of the Earth, which may throw some light on the fate of human beings when we look at the broad sweep of time.  "More than 99 per cent of all organisms that have ever lived on Earth are extinct. As new species evolve to fit ever-changing ecological niches, older species fade away," National Geographic science writer Michael Greshko wrote. "At least a handful of times in the last 500 million years, 75 to more than 90 per cent of all species on Earth have disappeared in a geological blink of an eye in catastrophes we call mass extinctions." As human beings, we need to remind ourselves that we are oxygen-breathing biped mammals. In other words, we are animals. Evolutionary science demonstrates that we are continuous, not discontinuous, with other animal species.  Fossils from around the world suggest the "terrible lizards" were in decline before the collision. If one's view of the world is based on science, we are not special, we were not placed here by a God to be the custodians of the Earth (and if we were, we have let the Almighty down big time!) and like all other species, we will have our place in the sun. We will die out, and other, more adaptable, life forms will take our place.   The myth that we are somehow special and will continue to live forever as a dominant species is based on a deluded human-centric form of existential narcissism.   We may wring our hands and our hearts may ache at the rapid destruction of wildlife that is happening right now before our eyes, but we never seem to seriously consider that we may go the same way.   But as the poet John Donne wrote: "Do not ask for whom the bell tolls, it tolls for thee". We may liken the state of the Earth to a man who has just been told by his doctors that he has lung cancer.  There is treatment available that might save him, but it cannot be guaranteed that it will work.  The human species may, metaphorically, keep puffing away on fossil fuels and an inevitable death may well be the outcome in a blip of geological time.   But even if we "undergo the treatment"  changing over to sustainable forms of renewable energy, for example  there is no guarantee of survival.   Friends of mine who work professionally in palliative care tell me that most people have peaceful deaths. Even better, it is well documented that some people have transformative spiritual experiences as they near the inevitability of death.   They atone for all of their past mistakes quite freely and without restraint, their hearts open to loved ones and enemies alike, and they experience a sense of oneness with the transience of life and the interconnectedness of all things.  We can only aspire to the same maturity of spirit.  As a psychologist, years of clinical experience tells me it is healthier to gently bring anxiety out into the open and discuss it empathically with others rather than taking refuge in angry denial or manic defence.   This includes how we talk to children about this distressing topic when they want to engage us with their questions and their fears. Climate change is scary, and it can be really distressing for children. This is how one mum found a way to talk to her kids honestly, without making them panic. The same guidelines for talking to children generally about death can be applied here.   When I have worked with children who have a parent with a life-threatening illness, I find it is much wiser for the adults to tell the truth calmly and kindly rather than give false hope.   There is a vast difference in saying to a child, "Daddy is very sick but the doctors are going to make him better and he will be home soon," compared to, "Daddy is very sick and everyone is doing everything they can to help him get better but we can't be sure he is going to live much longer. We all hope he pulls through." Children can sniff out the anxious emotion behind the sweet syrupy words of false optimism much more than we give them credit for.  They pick up an incongruence between the positive message and the exaggerated emotion with which it is expressed, and it confuses them.  Being straight with them will calm them far more than false optimism.   This means the adults learning to calm themselves in the face of their own inevitable mortality.   The practice of mindfulness and the contemplation of one's own death is one beneficial way to do this. While mass extinction from global warming, including mass extinction of human beings, is a new and concerning threat that we have not had to face before, death itself is not new. Our here-and-now lives are more vibrant and full of gratitude when we can embrace them fully. Geoff Dawson is a psychologist and Zen Buddhist teacher. 
Tasmania news: Bandidos member charged over theft, basketball announcement imminent
Here's what you need to know today: Two men allegedly involved with the Bandidos motorcycle gang have been charged in relation to the theft of $5,000 in building materials from a Devonport motel. Tasmania Police said they conducted a search at the Bandidos clubhouse on February 26, following the theft the previous day at the Argosy Motel. "A 32-year-old Bandidos outlaw motorcycle gang member and a 39-year-old Bandidos associate have been charged with stealing," police said, adding as a result of the search, "all of the stolen property has been recovered". Both men have been charged with stealing and have been bailed to appear in the Devonport Magistrates Court on April 20. Anyone with further information is urged to contact Tasmania Police on 131 444, or Crime Stoppers anonymously on 1800 333 000 or online at crimestopperstas.com.au. The Tasmanian Government has reminded the public there has been no positive local results from coronavirus testing and the state "remains well prepared", in the wake of the Federal Government's implementation of its emergency response plan. In a joint statement, Premier Peter Gutwein and Health Minister Sarah Courtney said they had received an "update" that the Government had "moved ahead of the World Health Organisation and is now effectively operating on the basis that a pandemic had been declared".  "The Prime Minister believes the risk of a global pandemic is very much upon us and as a result the Commonwealth Government has taken steps necessary to prepare for such a pandemic," the statement reads. "The plan includes preparations for extra controls at airports and ports, further quarantine measures and detailing how schools should react to any widespread outbreak." The Tasmanian Government said it "recognises travel restrictions may have an impact on some Tasmanian businesses", and encouraged anyone with any questions to call 1800 440 026 or visit the website. Tasmania's entry into the National Basketball League is expected to be made official today. It is understood league owner Larry Kestelman will hold a press conference this afternoon in Hobart to announce that Tasmania will enter the competition. It will come off the back of a Glenorchy City Council vote that will see the Derwent Entertainment Centre sold to the State Government. The Tasmanian team will play home games out of the revamped arena from next year. The state has not been represented in the national competition since 1996. The Tasmanian Greens have referred two ministers and a public servant to the Integrity Commissioner for alleged misconduct relating to a now-defunct forest protest ban, which threatened those staging demonstrations with fines of up to $500,000 before the ban was withdrawn on Tuesday. Greens leader Cassy O'Connor alleged Resources Minister Guy Barnett, Attorney-General Elise Archer and Mark Cocker from WorkSafe misused their positions, abused power and issued an unlawful prohibition against the Bob Brown Foundation seeking to peacefully protest. "We know this was an overtly political act designed to intimidate peaceful protesters who are standing up for our beautiful forests. We hope that the Integrity Commission recognises that this is an issue of ethics in government," she said. Ms Archer described the action taken by the Greens as disgraceful.  Tasmania's fifth wind farm has started power generation, nudging the state towards its target of using 100 per cent renewable energy by 2022. The $280 million Granville Harbour Wind Farm is expected to produce energy for 46,000 homes.  Resources Minister Guy Barnett said that production would help Tasmania become fully reliant on renewable energy in two years time. "We're on track to get to 100 per cent, fully self-sufficient in renewable energy by 2022 and that's very encouraging indeed" he said. But Goanna Energy's Marc White said the State Government still had to do more to meet the target. "The Granville Harbour wind farm will produce around two per cent of the state's consumption". "The Cattle Hill wind farm will produce about 3 to 4 per cent, so that'll still see us with a little bit of a deficit on the average inflow a year," he said. The state forecast for Friday is for showers and cool conditions in the south-west, clearing showers and cool in the south-east, and mostly cloudy and cool-to-mild in the north.  Saturday: Showers, mild in the south-west. Windy on the highlands. Mostly sunny, warm in the south-east. Mostly sunny, mild-to-warm in the north. Sunday: Showers, mild in the south-west. Mostly cloudy, mild in the south-east. Mostly cloudy, cool-to-mild in the north-west. Late shower, mild in the north-east. Monday: Showers, cool in the south-west. Mostly sunny, mild in the south-east. Mostly sunny, cool-to-mild in the north-west. Clearing shower, cool in the north-east.. A full and updated list of warnings can be found on the Bureau of Meteorology's Tasmanian Warnings summary webpage. Updated information about fires and permits can be found on the Tasmanian Fire Service website. Source: Bureau of Meteorology 
Vale the great Australian summer  devastated by bushfires, drought and flooding rain
"In January, days stretch out, with lots to do and find; we feel the sand, we tie the bait, we swim, we play, we stay up late." So mused acclaimed author Jane Godwin in her celebration of the great Australian summer  a narrative intrinsically linked to our national identity. From family camping trips along the coast, to bouts of backyard cricket, our love of summer cuts across all sects of the country, unifying even the most divided amongst us. But this year, for much of the eastern seaboard, languid days basking in the breeze were replaced by anxiety: for our homes and neighbours, for our families and friends, and for a future marred by climate change and the more extreme conditions it has started to bring. Images of sun-drenched families that would once symbolise the holidays were replaced by apocalyptic scenes of children in masks, enveloped by a red and orange hue. Thousands of homes that should have been adorned with Christmas decorations were instead reduced to rubble, and grieving families were left to grapple with the reality that their loved ones would not see the summer's end. As we mark the close of summer and the horror bushfire season  escalated by the outbreak of coronavirus and flooding along the east coast  any residual glow the festive season may have once had is nowhere to be seen. "So many people have come out of this summer probably in a worse sort of condition  because of the disruption and anxiety that came with the bushfires," says University of Tasmania fire ecologist David Bowman. "I think everyone in Australia probably knows someone who was affected. "It's a big event in your life, but now we're moving back to real life, the kids have to go back to school, people have to go back to jobs, and they're beginning to pause and go 'I never had a holiday'." So, is it time to say goodbye to the typical Australian summer for good? It is a question Professor Bowman has been pondering since the nation found itself in the crosshairs of unprecedented climatic conditions, now known as the "Black Summer". This bushfire season was always predicted to be ferocious, but with months of hot weather to go, it has already left a scar on the nation. As we contemplate a future where these kinds of catastrophes become increasingly frequent, he argued in an op-ed for The Conversation, perhaps it's time we rearranged the calendar and reschedule the peak holiday period to March or April. The proposal struck a chord with readers both at home and abroad, Professor Bowman says  something he puts down to its cross-cutting sentiment. "The Prime Minister got caught out on his holiday  [and then there was] the effect on the firefighters who missed out on their holiday and important family time," he says. "Something comparatively simple like rescheduling holidays, in my view, that's a trivial alteration in the adaptive program we're staring down the barrel at." While the economic impacts of the fires are predicted to run into the billions and the impact on tourism and trade has been highly publicised, there are lingering questions around the more intangible impact the lost summer has had on our national wellbeing. Ross Garnaut's climate change prediction is coming true and it's going to cost Australia billions, economists warn. Tony Veal, an adjunct professor at the University of Technology Sydney, likens it to the Cold War. "At one time, people were worried about whether we were going to be blown up by nuclear war, people can get very stressed about those things, as many people are by climate change," he says. "And if it's on your doorstep with fires and floods, it becomes even more stressful. Obviously, the people directly involved with it are stressed, but it can have an impact on the community at large." Professor Veal, who specialises in the role of leisure in work and planning policy, doesn't mince words: "In a very basic sense, if you don't have any time off, it'll kill you". But with nearly 80 per cent of Australians affected by the summer crisis in some way, the idea of a holiday might seem like a foreign concept for many  from those on the frontline working tirelessly trying to reckon with the ruins and communities living under the shadows of tragedy, to tourists who found themselves stranded in the fire zones and those forced to reschedule their summer break. "Now we have this coronavirus issue, so all those things contribute to stress," he says. "Whether you sit and chat with your friends or family, or play with your kids, or whether you go to the pub and have a drink, you need time to do it. "In times of stress, whatever the source of the stress, one needs that outlet. If you don't have those opportunities to take a break, there are consequences." The link between trauma born out of natural disasters and its impact on productivity and wellbeing has been well documented, both anecdotally and in scientific literature. But with millions of hectares burnt, wildlife decimated and the devastation firmly etched into the national consciousness, psychiatrists fear the secondary effects could be more widespread than many first thought. They are the heart-stopping videos that stopped the nation and stunned the world. But who filmed them and how did their stories end? "You might find that a person will be safe in their house, but they're worried about their friends out in the fire truck," says associate professor John Allan, president of the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists. "The blanket coverage we've had on television  I think people really saw this as a watershed moment for the country. "There's a secondary effect on many, many people through relationships and love  love for their country and love for their community  [and so] a very broad range of people are affected." As the weeks and months pass, and the nation irrevocably turns its attention elsewhere, the residual impact will continue to be felt by those communities on the frontline of the disaster. But while many will recover, for others, the trauma of our lost summer will remain for years to come. "You have the event, and all the support rushes in, there's all this wonderful stuff, and then the support is withdrawn," Professor Allan says. "There are people where that trauma lingers, and that becomes manifest over the next year or two, so starting about now. "This is the time we really need to make sure everyone has recovered, and those that haven't, really need that support." 
Turkey says it will let refugees into Europe after troops killed in Syria
Refugees in Turkey have headed towards Europe after an official declared that borders had been thrown open in response to the escalating war in Syria, where 33 Turkish soldiers were killed by Russian-backed Syrian government troops. European officials rushed to respond to Turkey's direct threat to reverse an agreement that halted the migration crisis of 2015-2016, when more than a million people arrived by sea in Greece and crossed the Balkans on foot. Moscow and Ankara traded blame over the strike in northwest Syria, the deadliest attack suffered by the Turkish army in nearly 30 years. Turkish financial markets plunged over the prospect of the country being pulled far more deeply into a new escalation of the nine-year-old war across the border in Syria. "We have decided, effectively immediately, not to stop Syrian refugees from reaching Europe by land or sea," a senior Turkish official said on condition of anonymity. "All refugees, including Syrians, are now welcome to cross into the European Union," the official said, adding that police and border guards had been stood down. Within hours, a column of dozens of migrants was heading on foot towards the European frontier in the early morning light. A man carried a small child in his arms. Others rode in taxis. The Syrian conflict has spawned a whole generation of children impacted by bombing and conflict. "We heard about it on the television," said Afghan migrant Sahin Nebizade, 16, in a group packed into one of three taxis parked on a highway. They had been living in Istanbul and were heading for a border crossing to Greece. At the Greek border, Hamid Muhammed, carrying a young girl, said he had been turned back by Greek police. "We want the Turkish and European governments to open this gate," he said. Greece and Bulgaria said they were immediately reinforcing their frontiers. Bulgaria's Prime Minister said the prospect of a new migration crisis was even more of a threat when European countries were struggling to respond to the coronavirus. However, both the EU and the United Nations refugee agency noted reports of any change at the border were still unofficial and Ankara had not made any formal announcement. Inside Syria itself, the escalated fighting has brought on perhaps the worst humanitarian crisis of the entire nine-year-old war. A million civilians have been displaced since December inside Syria near the Turkish border, in desperate winter conditions. Turkey, already home to 3.7 million Syrian refugees, said it could not take more. The Syrian civil war has worsened dramatically in recent months despite largely vanishing from the agenda of Western countries. Seven years of bloody conflict have backed hundreds of thousands of civilians into this deadly corner of the country with nowhere to run. What happens in Idlib is in the hands of leaders from Russia, Iran, Syria and Turkey. Government forces, backed by Russian air power, have launched an assault to capture the northwest, the last remaining territory held by rebels backed by Turkey. With diplomacy sponsored by Ankara and Moscow in tatters, NATO-member Turkey has come closer than ever in the conflict to direct confrontation with Russia on the battlefield. Presidents Tayyip Erdogan and Vladimir Putin spoke by telephone on Friday morning to head off further confrontation. The Kremlin said they agreed on the need for a new arrangement to avert clashes in Syria's Idlib province. Turkey said the leaders agreed to meet as soon as possible. "There is a risk of sliding into a major open international military confrontation," EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell said on Twitter. "It is also causing unbearable humanitarian suffering and putting civilians in danger." The return of refugees to the frontier was an immediate reminder of the 2015-2016 crisis  Western Europe's biggest migration since World War II  when 4,000 people drowned trying to reach Greece. Since then, Mr Erdogan has repeatedly threatened to "open the gates" in several disputes with European states. "At a time when we are imposing stricter border monitoring over the coronavirus, imagine if we have an inflow of hundreds of thousands of migrants," Bulgaria's Prime Minister Boyko Borissov said, announcing the mobilisation of extra police on the border with Turkey. "We cannot afford that." Turkey, for years the principal ally of rebels fighting against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, has sent thousands of troops and heavy military hardware in recent weeks into Idlib. Mr Erdogan has warned that Turkey would repel Mr Assad's forces unless they pulled back from Turkish posts. The United Nations and others have called for a ceasefire. The air strike on Thursday raised Turkey's military death toll to 54 in February in Idlib. It was the worst losses suffered by the Turkish military since a 1993 attack by Kurdish separatist guerrillas. Turkey's lira slid to a 17-month low and its main stock index plunged 10 per cent early on Friday even though authorities banned short selling across all Turkish shares. The United States, which has troops in another part of Syria, said it was very concerned about the reported attack on Turkish soldiers and stood by "our NATO ally Turkey". ABC/wires 
North Korea fires projectiles after threatening 'momentous' action
North Korea fired three short-range projectiles off its east coast on Monday, South Korea's military said, two days after the North threatened to take "momentous" action to protest outside condemnation over its earlier live-fire exercises. Seoul's Joint Chiefs of Staff said the multiple kinds of projectiles fired from the eastern coastal town of Sondok flew as far as 200 kilometres at a maximum altitude of 50 kilometres before landing in the waters between the Korean Peninsula and Japan. A JCS statement said South Korea expressed "strong regret" over the launches that, it said, violate a past inter-Korean agreement aimed at lowering military animosities. South Korea's national security director, Defence Minister and spy chief held an emergency video conference and agreed the North Korean action was not helpful to efforts to establish peace on the Korean Peninsula, according to South Korea's presidential Blue House. Japan's Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga said North Korea fired suspected ballistic missiles. North Korea is testing ballistic missiles again  but where's Donald Trump's "fire and fury"? He said the multiple North Korean projectiles travelled 100 to 200 kilometres but none landed inside Japan's exclusive economic zone. "North Korea's latest action, on top of its repeated firings of ballistic missiles, is a serious threat to the peace and safety of Japan and  a grave problem for the entire international society," Mr Suga said. In the past 10 days, North Korea has said leader Kim Jong-un supervised two rounds of live-fire artillery exercises in its first weapons tests since late November. Mr Kim had entered the new year with a vow to bolster his nuclear deterrent and not to be bound by a major weapons test moratorium amid a deadlock in US-led diplomacy aimed at convincing Mr Kim to abandon his nuclear program in return for economic and political benefits. South Korea and some European countries protested against the second North Korea drills on March 2, which they believe involved ballistic missile launches in a violation of UN Security Council resolutions. North Korea insists it has the right to conduct military drills in the face of US and South Korean forces on its doorstep. The UN Security Council did not issue any statement after discussing North Korea's March 2 drills, but five European members condemned what they called "provocative actions". Belgium, Estonia, France, Germany and the United Kingdom said afterwards that the tests undermine regional and international peace, security and stability. The North's Foreign Ministry on Saturday accused the five European countries of "repeating an absurd argument of condemnation and violation resolutions of the UN whenever we conducted military drills." "The reckless behaviour of these countries, instigated by the US, will become a fuse that will trigger our yet another momentous reaction," a ministry statement said. North Korea has threatened Australia with "disaster"  but could its missiles reach our shores? Last week, Kim Jong-un's younger sister levelled diatribes and crude insults against South Korea for criticising its earlier live-fire exercises, but her statement was followed by Mr Kim sending a letter to South Korean President Moon Jae-in expressing condolences over its coronavirus outbreak. Some experts say North Korea may intend to catch South Korea off-balance before seeking help in reviving its dilapidated economy, since the US has said sanctions on North Korea will stay in place unless it takes significant steps toward denuclearisation. "The coronavirus is likely exceeding North Korea's public health capacity, so Kim Jong-un is playing a two-level game," said Leif-Eric Easley, associate professor at Seoul's Ewha Womans University  "At the domestic level, his regime claims to protect the people with drastic quarantine measures and military exercises against external threats. "Pyongyang may be seeking international assistance, but remains obsessed with not appearing in an inferior position to Seoul." Nuclear talks between Pyongyang and Washington remain stalled since the breakdown of a second summit between Mr Kim and President Donald Trump in Vietnam in early 2019. Subsequent talks between the two countries failed to produce much progress amid disputes over how much sanctions relief should be given in return for a limited step to move away from nuclear weapons by North Korea. AP 
International Women's Day marches around the world call for end to violence against women
Thousands of people around the world have defied government restrictions and fears of the coronavirus to take to the streets to mark International Women's Day. Large demonstrations demanding increased gender equality and an end to female exploitation took place in cities including Madrid, Buenos Aries, Kiev and Manila. Demonstrations in Paris and Bishkek, the capital of Kyrgyzstan, were marred by clashes between police and demonstrators. In Pakistan, thousands of women held rallies across the country despite the threat of violence from fundamentalist groups. Demonstrators clashed with police in Chile and Turkey, as well as Mexico where thousands gathered to protest the number of women being killed in the country every day. Dozens of women covered Mexico City's central Zocalo square with names of victims like Adriana, Dulce, Paola, Nayeli, Ingrid, Maria and many others as part of protests against gender violence. The march was then led by the mothers of murdered girls. "I don't want to be the next one, and I don't want my mother to be the next one," Ana Paula Santos, a 21-year-old university student, said. Government data shows 3,825 women suffered violent deaths in Mexico last year, 7 per cent more than in 2018. Thousands more have gone missing without a trace in recent years. That works out to an average of more than 10 women killed each day, many of those at the hands of their partners, making it one of the most dangerous countries in the world for females. Murders of women in Mexico are often accompanied by sexual violence and brutality, and authorities seem incapable of preventing or properly investigating the crimes, very few of which result in convictions. Marchers carried signs saying, "we are the heart of those that no longer beat", and, "I'm marching today so that I don't die tomorrow". Bands of masked women smashed windows, lit fires and spray-painted messages on buildings. Many in the crowd cheered at the sight of vandals spraying messages like, "we're fed up". One of the biggest demonstrations was in Chile, where thousands flooded the streets of the capital, Santiago. There was dancing and music as well as angry demands for gender equality and an end to violence against women. "They kill us, they rape us, and nobody does anything," some chanted. National police estimated 125,000 people took part in the capital and nearly 35,000 in other cities, but organisers said the crowds were far larger. Many protesters demanded that a proposed new constitution strengthen rights for women and thousands wore green scarves in a show of support for activists in neighbouring Argentina, which is considering a proposal to legalise elective abortion. In the Philippines, where abortions are punishable by up to six years in prison, President Rodrigo Duterte's record on women's rights became one of the targets of the protests in Manila. "In many different ways or forms, women are being exploited and taken advantage of," Arlene Brosas, the representative of a Filipino advocacy group, said during a rally that drew hundreds to the area near the presidential palace. Tens of thousands of women took to the streets in Madrid and other Spanish cities, with a massive banner reading, "with rights, without barriers. Feminists without frontiers", carried at the front of the march in the capital. Spanish health authorities did not put any restrictions on the march but recommended that anyone with symptoms like those of coronavirus stay home. Authorities said 120,000 people participated in Madrid's march, down from 350,000 last year. In Pakistan, women managed to rally in cities across the country, despite petitions filed in court seeking to stop them. The opposition was stirred in part by controversy over a slogan used in last year's march: "My Body, My Choice." Some conservative groups had threatened to stop this year's marches by force. But Pakistani officials pledged to protect the marchers. The rallies are notable in a conservative country where women often do not feel safe in public places because of open harassment. In Istanbul, Turkey, riot police fired tear gas to try to disperse thousands of demonstrators, while security forces in Kyrgyzstan arrested about 60 people  reported to be mostly women  after a group of men tried to break up what authorities called an unauthorised rally in the capital, Bishkek. Tens of thousands of women also marched through Paris, bemoaning the "virus of the patriarchy". "Enough impunity!" chanted some activists, who focused on the high rate of women killed by their husbands in France, where one woman was killed every two or three days by a current or former partner in 2019. The French Government has increased efforts to crack down on domestic violence. "They should provide resources for shelters for women, victims of violence, real resources, human resources, also prevention programs for violent men," union activist Julia Parbotin said. ABC/wires 
For Russell Basser, the pressure was immense. It was 2009. Swine flu had arrived — the last global pandemic before coronavirus. Though it was far removed from the devastating impact of COVID-19 — there were no lockdowns and life in Australia remained relatively normal — the virus was killing people. Healthy young people. Like today, the race was on to find a vaccine. And Dr Basser — a top executive at research firm CSL's clinical and regulatory arm — was in charge of finding it. "It [swine flu] was actually hitting kids and pregnant women," Dr Basser said. "We were worried this was going to be something akin to the Spanish flu. "We were racing. We put our full body and soul commitment into getting that vaccine developed. "And there was pressure, as there is now."The pressure is real. Across the world, more than 115 coronavirus vaccines are in development. Eight human trials are underway — five in China. It is a global race between nations and the subject of US espionage claims against China. Billions are being poured into development, with big pharmaceutical companies teaming up to speed up the process. But the prize — if it comes — will become a powerful political tool, potentially freeing the citizens of the country that produces it from the shackles of life with coronavirus. And though the stakes may not have been as high in 2009, lessons have been learnt to help with the response today. Two people in PPE protective gear, and a person holding up a passport. This facility in Wuhan, China has started phase two human clinical trials of a coronavirus vaccine(AAP)CSL, today the most valuable company in the country, is Australia's biosecurity partner and manufacturer of the seasonal flu jab. As it is focused on influenza vaccines, it is not actively involved in the search for a coronavirus vaccine, apart from supporting others in their efforts, like the University of Queensland. But back in 2009, it was at the forefront. And it achieved its goal. Dr Basser's Australian-based team was the first to carry out human trials of a swine flu vaccine. CSL then received approval in September 2009 with the Australian government kicking off its immunisation program the same month. A Chinese firm working on similar timeframes kicked off its program days later. "It was a bit of a relief more than anything," Dr Basser told the ABC. "A relief that we could develop a vaccine with the volumes required for the Australian population, much more efficiently and much quicker than we might have been able to. "We were very efficient in what we did."But what happened next is the issue that has some in the global health community worried. By the end of 2009, about 37,000 Australians were diagnosed with swine flu and 190 people died. Yet Australia came out of the swine flu pandemic relatively unscathed because of CSL's swift response. CSL had agreements with a number of countries: Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, the US and Canada to hand over the vaccine, in turn producing a healthy windfall for the company. Yet, the governments of those countries determined how it got used. These countries entered into contracts with big pharmaceutical companies, effectively monopolising the H1N1 swine flu vaccine at the expense of poorer nations, who were pushed to the back of the queue. Looking back, Dr Basser said the mistakes made more a decade ago were informing today's decisions. "As a global ecosystem of vaccine developers, not only do we need to look out for our own communities, but we also do need to look after the rest of the world," he said. "And one of the big learnings from swine flu was that the system and network wasn't as well set up as what it could have been. "The world's had a wake-up call."Evening out the playing fieldTony Cunningham, an adviser to the Federal Government on Australia's coronavirus vaccine response, consulted with CSL and the global vaccine company that distributed it across the world back in 2009. The founding director of the Westmead Institute for Medical Research's virus research centre said the fact that countries would "often look after their own populations first" was relevant to COVID-19 response and that issue remains a "major concern" for the World Health Organization. But since the swine flu experience, there has been a global push to level the playing field. The Switzerland-based Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), founded in 2016 by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, was established to coordinate the development of new vaccines to prevent and contain infectious disease epidemics. It is in the midst of negotiations with a range of companies, research arms and state-backed organisations for a coronavirus vaccine. Last week it granted American vaccine development company Novavax US$384 million ($599 million) for its push to find a coronavirus vaccine — CEPI's biggest-ever funding boost. Will history repeat?There are still concerns if a vaccine is successful, what happened in 2009 could happen again. The concerns are centred on countries such as the US — a leader in pharmaceutical research — being hit so hard by coronavirus that if one is produced in-country it will not be shared worldwide for months or even years. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. The ABC understands CEPI's negotiations with companies in the US and the Trump administration have been sensitive, with work still to be done in locking down agreements. The concerns have also spread to China. Although some commentators suggest China is keen to use the development of a vaccine to reboot its global standing on the back of coronavirus, others fear a state-backed firm may not be as generous with its intellectual property. Professor Cunningham said the speed at which companies and researchers were racing towards a vaccine was exciting — but also concerning. "It generally takes us eight to 18 years to produce a vaccine, the shortest is about four years," he said. "We're seeking to do this, which everyone is saying, within 12 to 18 months. We have got to be careful — we can't short change the checks on safety. "But this is going to require alliances, and I see a lot of collaboration happening around the world; people are energised by the emergency."Collaborations big and swiftPharmaceutical giants Sanofi and GSK joined forces last month to look at developing a vaccine. Pfizer, another global pharmaceutical leader, is collaborating with a German biotech, while Johnson and Johnson, the biggest pharmaceutical company in the world, has committed US$1 billion ($1.6 billion) in collaboration with the US Government to try and find a vaccine. While it is not unusual to see collaborations in the sector, big pharma intellectual property expert and Herbert Smith Freehills partner Rebekah Gay said the speed at which these agreements were moving was "extraordinary". "There's been a willingness on the part of companies to just get in and start working without being caught up in legal intricacies or arguments about intellectual property ownership," she said. "And what that means is we're seeing vaccine candidates in a timeline that we've never seen before."In Australia, CSL is the manufacturing or "industrial" partner of the University of Queensland's vaccine push — which is being part-funded by CEPI — and would produce it locally. But if a locally produced vaccine did not eventuate, CSL would work with the Australian Government in its negotiations with foreign governments, CEPI, other companies and research groups to bring the successful vaccine to Australia. Some experts predict any vaccine would need two doses, meaning manufacturers would have to work together to produce the near 15 billion doses to protect the world. Dr Basser, now senior vice-president of CSL vaccine arm Seqirus, said in the 11 years since swine flu the research community had woken up. And although there were still many uncertainties, he said the response to the COVID-19 threat so far had shown its development over the past decade. "This is not about a commercial return," he said. "This is about overcoming a threat to everybody. And that we could share appropriately if only one or two vaccines were successful. "And given the way the global vaccine ecosystem has behaved up until now, I am cautiously optimistic we'll find a solution."
US President Donald Trump says he has started taking an anti-malaria drug that researchers say should not be used to combat coronavirus and has the potential to cause serious side effects. Studies from the US, France and China have concluded that hydroxychloroquine is not effective for treating COVID-19, and in April the US Food and Drug Administration warned its use could cause heart problems. Despite that, Mr Trump has called the drug a "game changer" in the fight against COVID-19, and now says he has been taking it for more than a week. In Australia, hydroxychloroquine has been spruiked by Clive Palmer, who took out back-to-back full-page newspaper advertisements to claim his foundation had bought 32,900,000 doses of it. Here's what we know about hydroxychloroquineWhat is hydroxychloroquine?An arrangement of hydroxychloroquine tablets. Several studies in different countries have yet to show benefits for coronavirus patients taking hydroxychloroquine.(AP: John Locher)It is usually in tablet form and regulates the activity of the immune system. It has mostly been prescribed to treat malaria, lupus and rheumatoid arthritis. Hydroxychloroquine has also been used for years to dampen the immune system in people with autoimmune conditions. In the US, conditional emergency use for adults hospitalised with a coronavirus infection has been approved by the USFDA, while in Australia a trial is underway using Australian Defence Force personnel. Research into its potential risks is ongoing. Why has it been linked to coronavirus?In clinical trials, hydroxychloroquine has been shown to stop coronavirus from entering cells. But that doesn't mean it would work outside lab conditions as a treatment. "One of the key things is that a lot of these drugs we find are going to be effective against the virus just in cells, [and] probably won't be that effective in the disease setting," Dr Larisa Labzin, an immunologist at the University of Queensland, said. "Really what we're looking for is not just that these drugs inhibit the virus replicating in people, but also that the people who get sick with the virus actually do better."Because hydroxychloroquine is already used in treatments for other conditions it can be fast-tracked in development to go straight to large human trials, unlike other drugs that would need to go through more tests first. In March, there was a surged in demand for hydroxychloroquine, driven by claims about its potential as a coronavirus treatment. That led to pharmacists being told to stop dispensing it so there would be enough supply for those who needed it as part of treatment for rheumatoid arthritis and malaria. Does it work for coronavirus?Several prominent doctors say they are worried that people could decide to take hydroxychloroquine because of Mr Trump's actions. "There is no evidence that hydroxychloroquine is effective for the treatment or the prevention of COVID-19," said Dr Patrice Harris, president of the American Medical Association. "The results to date are not promising."International research efforts have not yet found any benefits of taking the drug for those with coronavirus. A study from France concluded the drug did not significantly reduce admission to intensive care or deaths among patients with severe cases. A randomised clinical trial from China showed no improvement for patients with mild or moderate symptoms who were prescribed hydroxychloroquine. The drug made no difference in rates of clearing the virus and did not reduce the duration of symptoms, but did cause side effects. Two earlier large observational studies, each involving around 1,400 patients in New York, found no benefit from hydroxychloroquine. Going even further, two studies published last week in the leading medical journal BMJ concluded that hydroxychloroquine should not be used in the treatment of coronavirus. What are the possible side effects?The USFDA has released emergency-use guidelines for hydroxychloroquine outlining warnings for its potential side effects. They are:Dangerously rapid heart rateAbnormal heart rhythmsProblems with the heart muscle properly recharging between beatsIssues with the heart's ability to pump blood around the bodySevere hypoglycemiaRupturing of red blood cellsLow counts for platelets and red and white blood cellsLiver failureKidney failureIncreased risk of seizuresPsychosisDeliriumSuicidal behaviourHallucinationsRetina damageWhat is the Australian connection?The Australian Defence Force is testing Chloroquine, from which hydroxychloroquine is derived, on its personnel as a potential preventative measure against COVID-19. The resumption of trials of the drug has horrified an East Timor veteran who has been suffering long-term health issues after taking part in a controversial clinical trial of the drug almost 20 years ago. So far, 42 personnel have enrolled and started the 14-week trial, and Defence is seeking up to 700 civilian and ADF frontline healthcare workers to volunteer. Associate Professor Jane Quinn, a pharmacology researcher at Charles Sturt University's School of Veterinary Sciences, said she did not think there was currently enough international evidence of efficacy to justify the ADF trial. "Chloroquine is a drug that's been used for a very long time in the prevention and treatment for malaria and over time it's become increasingly out of favour particularly for having quite a significant side-effect profile," she said. "That's what makes it a little bit surprising that Chloroquine, particularly, is being suggested for use in this ADF trial."Which other drugs are being looked at?The experimental antiviral drug remdesivir, which belongs to a group used to treat HIV and hepatitis C, has shown some promise in the lab for treating SARS, MERS and coronavirus. Mr Trump has said he wants the USFDA to approve the drug "as quickly as they can". But early studies of its use have been criticised for lacking proper control measures, and two trials in China were suspended. Scientists are now waiting for the results of large randomised controlled trials in the US and Europe. The US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) has been giving the drug to some patients hospitalised with COVID-19 and lung complications. Preliminary results released in late April showed patients recovered 31 per cent faster with remdesivir than with a placebo. However, with conflicting data coming from a range of experiments, experts have urged caution. Remdesivir, which failed as a treatment for Ebola, is designed to disable the mechanism by which certain viruses, including coronavirus, make copies of themselves and potentially overwhelm their hosts' immune system.
House prices are tipped to fall by 11 per cent over the next three years as the COVID-related economic downturn bites, and for one group of Australian homeowners, it could not come at a worse time. Key points:Many small-scale investors use interest-only loans to buy propertyThese loans convert to principal and interest after a set timeThis increases financial pressure for those hit by the COVID downturnThere are an estimated 730,000 investors, many of whom are self-funded retirees or people planning for retirement, who have taken out interest-only bank loans in the belief property was a safe bet. Coronavirus has already delivered challenges, including rent arrears and the prospect of losing their tenants altogether. But now these private landlords are facing big hikes in their monthly bank repayments as they switch from interest-only to paying off the principal of their loans as well. Max Green is one of many who has been trying to negotiate with the banks for an extension to the interest-only period of his loans. The 69-year-old and his partner have bought two properties — one in Brisbane, the other in Perth — in the past 10 years to help fund their retirement. But the value of the Brisbane property has flatlined and the Perth property, a unit in the city's outer suburbs, has plummeted from $425,000 in 2016 to $300,000 today, according to a recent valuation. "The intent was … to provide us with some equity growth in the properties, which would then assist us in the future once I had retired," Mr Green said. "We had been advised that we would be able to extend the interest-only period."Instead, the couple face paying an additional $1,900 a month from July as they begin to pay off both the principal and interest on their loans. Mr Green said he still enjoyed his work as a project manager at WA's Water Corporation, but conceded his retirement ambitions had not gone to plan. He said he would now be forced to either keep working beyond 70, dip into the couple's superannuation to pay the banks, or sell at a loss. Investors brace for massive lossesOthers with similar investment plans have already decided to cut their losses and are now facing negative equity as a result — where their home is worth less than the amount they owe. Wayne Grimes, 50, said he couldn't help but laugh when he considered the price he would likely now get for his luxury investment unit. "I'm laughing because it is just ridiculous," he said. "I bought it for $670,000 … and I'll be lucky if I'm able to sell it for $400,000."The two-bedroom, two-bathroom house in the inner-city area of West Perth has been on the market for five weeks, but Mr Grimes has wanted to sell it since 2017 when his interest-only loan was converted to principal and interest. "Originally when I bought that place I was getting $895 a week in rent and now I get about $415 a week," Mr Grimes said. "That coupled with [paying] principal and interest, there has been a big hit to our cash flow."Like many investors, Mr Grimes put his savings into property to try to get ahead for retirement. "The whole idea behind it was so that we wouldn't have to rely on government pensions and government handouts when we got older, that we would be self-sufficient and create our own wealth," he said. "But it hasn't worked out that way."Mr Grimes said his bank had been very helpful in allowing him to defer his loan payments for six months due to coronavirus, which would buy him time to sell the West Perth property, albeit at a huge a loss. He faced being left with a $180,000 debt. "I'm not here to blame anyone, it's no-one's fault, it's just that this is how the market has gone," he said. Call for interest-only extensions by defaultSenior Liberal MP Dean Smith has raised the prospect of a "tsunami of forced sales" by desperate landlords offloading properties in a falling market. The party's chief whip in the Senate said he had received reports from investors around the country struggling with mortgage repayments. Some had been forced to sell, while others were at risk of losing their own homes. Sharp rise in unemployment could trigger house price crashThe spread of coronavirus across Australia could see unemployment reach about 10 per cent and house prices drop 20 per cent, says one economist. "If property investors are forced to sell into a falling market, then that is a cost that every Australian property owner will have to bear," he said. "That will put downward pressure on an already dampened property market and that will harm the financial wellbeing of every Australian family that owns a property, not just property investors."The West Australian senator argued the banks should by default, honour requests by borrowers to extend their interest-only periods to help them ride out the COVID crisis. "Some of the stories these property investors have told me are heartbreaking and the banks should be ashamed," he said. "What I see is a great opportunity for a non-taxpayer-funded stimulus where the banks could be more responsive to ease some of that financial pressure that people who are on interest-only repayment arrangements are experiencing just before they move to principal and interest."Senator Smith said extending interest-only loan periods had been common practice before regulators imposed responsible lending limits in 2015, but those restrictions had since been eased. He was seeking support from Government, Opposition and crossbench MPs for an inquiry into interest-only loans and the banks' handling of them during the COVID crisis. Banks already helping '700,000' customersThe Australian Banking Association would not comment directly on Senator Smith's call for banks to roll over interest-only terms by default during the COVID pandemic. But chief executive Anna Bligh said in a statement the industry had worked tirelessly since the beginning of the outbreak to help businesses and individuals doing it tough. Ms Bligh said 700,000 customers had already applied for, or been granted, support on loans totalling more than $200 billion. "Investors whose tenants are unable to pay rent as a result of COVID-19 are able to access a six-month deferral to mortgage repayments, including principal and interest, to help them get through to the other side of this crisis," she said. "Interest-only options are still available to customers, with banks needing to assess a request to remain on interest-only repayments on a case-by-case basis, in line with regulators' prudential requirements and guidance."Analyst fears a 'perfect storm' comingThe impact of forced sales by investors facing negative equity would certainly place further downward pressure on the housing market, according to CoreLogic head of research Tim Lawless. "I think it's something that lenders will be very conscious of once we reach the expiry of the leniency policies that are in place at the moment, which will be towards the end of September. That's something we need to watch very carefully," he said. But Mr Lawless said he believed the impact on many borrowers of switching to principal and interest (P&I) would be cushioned by the significant fall in interest rates. "The interest-only loans typically have a mortgage rate of around about 3.5 per cent, whereas a principle and interest loan will typically have a interest rate of 3.2 per cent, so there could be some cost-saving there for those investors who do transition from interest-only to P&I," he said. "By and large the best strategy … would be to try to secure the best P&I mortgage rate possible and pay their debt down rather than just continuing to pay off their interest. "But of course not everybody can do that."Analyst Martin North, from Digital Finance Analytics, said 8 per cent of property investors were looking to offload their properties in the coming months. Mr North said the COVID-19 crisis had created another pressure point for investors already struggling with the migration of their loans to principal and interest, plus other factors. "We've got a perfect storm emerging, particularly for property investors," he said. "We've had a very significant increase in the number of units on the market and some of those would have previously been used by international students, but of course they didn't come back [for the new term]. "Some of those would have been used by Airbnb, but they haven't come back."But Mr North said he did not support Senator Smith's call on banks to extend the interest-only terms for property investors. "Strategically, it does not make a lot of sense to me," he said. "We've got to deal with the amount of debt in the system. "We have too many property owners with too much debt, they're too leveraged."
Qantas has unveiled new measures to prevent the spread of COVID-19 on its flights — but social distancing is not one of them. "Social distancing on an aircraft isn't practical the way it is on the ground," Qantas medical director Dr Ian Hosegood said. "Given the low transmission risk on board, we don't believe it's necessary in order to be safe."It comes a week after Qantas chief executive Alan Joyce told the ABC that his company was seeking an exemption from social-distancing rules with the Federal Government. The airline will roll out its "Fly Well" safety measures from June 12. Pre-flight safetyPassengers will notice some major differences before they board a Qantas or Jetstar plane:Contactless check-in (via the airline's website or app) and self-serve bag drop are "strongly encouraged"There will be hand sanitising stations at the departure gates, and more regular cleaning"Increased physical distancing" at Qantas Lounges (but not on the flight itself)On-board precautionsQantas has also outlined its safety measures, in lieu of social distancing:It will provide masks to all passengers — wearing one is "not mandatory", but is recommended for "everyone's peace-of-mind""Enhanced cleaning" with a focus on seats, seatbelts, overhead lockers, air vents and toiletsOnce passengers are seated, they will be asked to "limit movement" around the cabin. They will also receive sanitising wipes to wipe down seat belts, trays and armrests themselvesThe airline will "encourage" passengers to download the Government's COVIDSafe app and "require" them to follow strict hygiene protocols'Extremely low' riskIn a statement, the airline said its air conditioning would get rid of almost all viruses on board. "The air-conditioning systems of all Qantas and Jetstar aircraft are already fitted with hospital-grade HEPA filters, which remove 99.9 per cent of all particles including viruses."It also said the cabin air was refreshed, on average, every five minutes during the flight. Dr Hosegood said there were a number of reasons why the risk of being infected with coronavirus onboard was "extremely low". "That's due to a combination of factors, including the cabin air filtration system, the fact people don't sit face-to-face and the high backs of aircraft seats acting as a physical barrier."Five-minute window of infectionThe Transport Workers Union said Qantas' new measures were not enough, accusing the airline of "downplaying" the risks. "At least 60 workers across the Qantas Group have been infected with the virus," the TWU said in a statement. "A dossier compiled by TWU safety experts revealed systematic failing in how Qantas dealt with an Adelaide Airport cluster, which saw 34 workers infected and over 750 quarantined.""It's hard for an airline to be profitable if social distancing were enforced," said Professor Raina MacIntyre, a virologist at the University of New South Wales. "But being in an aircraft is a high risk … it's an enclosed space where lots of people congregate for long periods of time. "Also, if a passenger has COVID-19, they may show no symptoms."When asked about Qantas' air-conditioning system, Professor MacIntyre said the use of HEPA filters would help to limit the risk of catching coronavirus. She said the risk of infection also depended on whether Qantas was using "outside" air or "recycled" air — the riskier of the two options. Even refreshing the cabin air every five minutes might not be enough. "Studies of tuberculosis show that if you're sitting a few rows behind or in front of someone, you're at risk," she said. "In the five minutes between air changes, you're still at risk. "I have made a personal decision not to fly unless I'm vaccinated from COVID-19."Across the world, many governments and pharmaceutical companies are spending billions of dollars in a race to develop a coronavirus vaccine, which could be months or years away. Earlier this week, the World Health Organization (WHO) has even warned that COVID-19 may "never go away" and we might have to learn to live with it.
Over the past several weeks, Australia has successfully flattened the curve, making it one of just a handful of countries ready to start easing restrictions designed to stop the spread of coronavirus. But with NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian and Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk in a war of words over when state borders should reopen, it is clear not every leader is ready for life to return to some semblance of normal. All over the country, there have been strict quarantines enforced with few, if any, exemptions. Here's a rundown of what to expect in each state and territory. Where can Australians travel right now?Not overseas, that's for sure. The Federal Government made a decision to ban Australians from travelling overseas on March 26 and there are no plans to lift that rule until at least the end of the year. As for entering the country, only Australian citizens, permanent residents and their immediate family members can travel to Australia — but you had better be prepared to stay in mandatory quarantine for 14 days after arriving. Travellers who have a compassionate or compelling reason to travel to Australia will need to have an exemption from the Australian Border Force Commissioner before travelling. On the domestic front, there are only limited flights operating at the moment — sometimes just one per day between capital cities — and they are expensive!NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian and Tourism Minister Stuart Ayres have called for all states and territories to reopen borders by July 1, but Australians will most likely have to wait until July for more frequent flight routes to start up between states — perhaps even later for Queensland. What are the rules for travelling to each state?They are many and varied and strictly enforced. Here they are below. QueenslandPremier Annastacia Palaszczuk has said she won't be considering opening up the state's borders until at least September. So that means nobody is allowed into the Sunshine State unless they have a border pass. Queenslanders can travel freely to NSW and Victoria and don't need to quarantine but should reconsider their reasons for doing so. They can also travel to the Northern Territory and South Australia but will need to show why that travel is essential. If they can't, they'll go into a 14-day quarantine. Moving house or starting a new job, or attending to other essential tasks such as getting to a medical appointment or caring for a family member, all fall into the essential category. Residents who live on the borders of Queensland, NSW, South Australia and the Northern Territory are able to cross into different states more easily for work, school or medical services if that was usually a part of their routine. New South WalesRethink travelling to Queensland or South Australia if you live in NSW. Unless there's a good reason, you'll be denied entry. But travel to Victoria and the ACT isn't a problem. There is no need to quarantine or self-isolate back in NSW if you have travelled interstate. However, if you have symptoms, even mild symptoms like a cough, get tested. A person in Sydney can travel to visit someone in regional NSW and while they can stay overnight, they shouldn't be going anywhere for a holiday. Northern TerritoryQueensland, South Australia and Western Australia have just as strict border controls as the Northern Territory, so those in the Top End are best to just sit tight and enjoy their relative freedom compared to the rest of the country. Of course, if they really want to, they can go to NSW, the ACT and Victoria. Non-essential travellers to the state are required to go through a police control checkpoint to verify their medical status and purpose of travel. Those not eligible for an exemption must complete 14 days of forced quarantine. South AustraliaIt's perfectly fine for South Aussies to travel to NSW and Victoria with no need to quarantine. Those thinking of heading to Queensland, Tasmania or the Northern Territory without cause will be turned back. Everyone entering South Australia will be required to isolate for 14 days as well. Exemptions will apply for essential transport, workers providing essential goods and services, medical needs, freight and supply chain operations, residents of border communities, carers, and for police, emergency services and ambulance workers. TasmaniaTravel from the Apple Isle to Victoria and NSW is ok. Anywhere else, not so. Tasmanian residents will be able to complete quarantine at their home but non-residents will have to complete quarantine at government-provided accommodation. Essential travellers may be exempted from quarantine. VictoriaThe only other jurisdictions to share Victoria's relaxed border restrictions are NSW and the ACT, so Garden State residents can travel to both those places easily. Tasmania, South Australia, Queensland, Western Australia and Northern Territory won't let you in without a good excuse. Travelling to a holiday house within Victoria is still permitted if you own it, or often stay there. There are no requirements in Victoria to quarantine after travelling domestically. Australian Capital TerritoryThere are no border restrictions here and residents can flit between their state and NSW and Victoria with ease. Every other state will require a two-week period of quarantine when you enter. Canberrans should only travel outside of the Canberra region to visit family and friends for the purpose of providing care and support and they will need to abide by rules in the jurisdiction they are travelling to. Western AustraliaIf you live in the West, you can't get into neighbouring states Northern Territory and South Australia easily. But NSW, Victoria and ACT are fine — if you can find a flight to get you there. There is also a temporary closure of the Western Australian border in place which is being strictly policed. Travellers cannot enter Western Australia unless an exemption has been granted. I need to see my family – are there any exemptions?Yes, most states will allow entry or travel on compassionate grounds. Just make sure if you need to apply for an exemption ahead of time — such as in Queensland, Western Australia, Tasmania or South Australia — you do so before attempting to enter. Exemptions will be permitted for people who must cross a border for critical goods and services; a person who wishes to attend the funeral of an immediate family member, or; a person who wishes to visit a terminally ill or dying immediate family member. Participating in child custody arrangements, Family Court or parole and bail conditions are also valid reasons to travel. People who live near the borders of Queensland, NSW, South Australia or the Northern Territory can continue to travel for work or education into different states. These residents can also travel interstate to obtain essential goods and services, including to attend school or childcare, or obtain medical supplies or services or other essential services. But don't stay in your non-home state for longer than necessary.
Jacky Pham and his wife both work as nail technicians. When social distancing measures to curb the COVID-19 pandemic were put in place two months ago, their jobs became redundant. But even though the couple had both lost their jobs, they still had to meet their $700 fortnightly rent payments for their home in Hobart's Sandy Bay suburb. "I'm in a difficult situation because of coronavirus. I don't have enough money to pay rent," Mr Pham said. "Sometimes we just skip one meal per day. "On a normal day, we eat two meals a day," Mr Pham said, adding some days they were down to one. Mr Pham said he contacted the Harcourts rental agency about having lost his income on March 26. He said he was given a form for rent deduction, which he filled out promptly, but had to keep following up. Mr Pham said the agency said the landlord had been "ignoring them" and the agency was not in a position to reduce rent without the landlord's permission. Two months after first flagging his predicament, Mr Pham is still paying the full price in rent. He has even resorted to asking his family in Vietnam for help, and was a day late in his last payment — for the first time ever. "I told the agency that I don't have enough money and that's why I have to lend money from my friend and my family. That's why I was late one day," he said. Harcourts property manager confirmed Mr Pham had flagged the change to his financial situation and inquired about rent relief. The manager said the landlord had not responded to requests to have his tenants' rent reviewed, and the agency could not make decisions on the landlord's behalf. However, the agent said Mr Pham was told he could pay as much rent as he could afford. Rent relief for those who've fallen through the cracksMr Pham is a foreign national and does not hold a permanent residency. This means he has not qualified for the Federal Government's JobKeeper or JobSeeker support during the pandemic. But from next week, he can apply for the Tasmanian Government's COVID-19 rent relief fund. The Government on Tuesday announced Tasmanians and visa holders who pay at least one-third of their income on rent, have less than $5,000 in savings and can prove they experience "extreme hardship" can access rent aid. The targeted support of a one-off $2,000 payment or four weeks' of rent covered also extends to tenants who are not covered by the Residential Tenancy Act. Attorney-General Elise Archer said many people had not been able to access JobKeeper and JobSeeker, and the new relief package benefits those who have previously fallen through the cracks. "We believe there remains some who are suffering extreme hardship and who require further assistance with rental payments," she said. "Payments will be made to landlords and it will be a requirement they pass on this level of assistance to renters to meet their rental obligations."Ms Archer estimated there were around 1,000 tenants in Tasmania who required this help. "We've uncapped the fund, so there isn't a limit. However, we believe that there could be up to $1.5 million dollars required," she said. The Tenants' Union of Tasmania solicitor Ben Bartl said there were around 26,000 temporary residents like Mr Pham in Tasmania, who did not get Federal Government support during the global pandemic. "We are getting calls every day from tenants who are unable to pay the rent. In some cases landlords are asking that they sell their possessions in order to pay the rent," he said. "These are desperate people in desperate circumstances and the Government should, where possible, provide assistance to them."He said the Tasmanian Government should be "congratulated" on putting in place the rent relief package, but the help could have come sooner. "In hindsight, yes, the Government should have moved sooner. But that said, the Government is one of the first in Australia to introduce this measure, and for that they are to be congratulated," he said. "We know that this initiative is in place until the 30th of June, which is when the emergency period is meant to end. "If COVID-19 does continue and tenants can demonstrate that they are in financial hardship, we would hope that the Government would step up and continue to provide additional funds."Mr Pham said his employer had already indicated he might not have a job to return to after restrictions are lifted. He said any help from the Government would go a long way. "I'm sure that I will apply for [rent relief]. With that financial support I can keep paying rent until I can get a new job," he said.
Global beer consumption is expected to be a massive 800 million cases down on last year, forcing breweries across the world to pour millions of litres of beer down the drain due to coronavirus restrictions. Key points:France has to destroy 10 million litres of beer due to the pandemic, as beer needs to be consumed freshMore than half of Australia's independent brewers could go underMost of Germany's 9,700 beer-related festivals have been cancelledThe closure of pubs, bars and restaurants and the cancellation of major beer-drinking festivals, such as Munich's Oktoberfest, have left many breweries fighting for their survival. A traditional and family-owned brewery in southern Germany that has been operating for more than 400 years is just one of many businesses brought to its knees, closing its doors forever. Rabobank grains and oilseeds senior analyst Cheryl Kalisch Gordon said the world's beer drinkers were expected to consume 82 million hectolitres less than last year. "That's a lot of beer globally … and we don't expect less drinking of beer on-premises would be made up by additional at-home consumption," she said. "The challenge will be greatest for those companies or beer producers that rely on that on-premises consumption, and typically … that would be craft beer producers."Australia's craft brewers under threatThe Independent Brewers Association (IBA) recent survey of more than 650 craft breweries in Australia found more than half may not survive without government assistance. IBA board member Johnny Latta said some brewers lost 70 per cent of their revenue overnight while others based in regional towns had lost all their revenue. "There will be a lot of breweries that will not reopen," Mr Latta said. "Unfortunately, there will be a lot of beer that just goes to waste because it is ageing and fresh beer is what everyone wants."Tom Freeman, who owns Wilkadene Woolshed Brewery in South Australia's Riverland, said they had to find creative new avenues to stay afloat. "We rely a lot on tourism, that really was a big stress and the financial impact we will feel for many years, I suppose," Mr Freeman said. He believed they were lucky to be able to package beer onsite and offer free deliveries to customers in metropolitan and regional areas, but the brewery lost about 75 per cent of its income in April alone. France destroys 10 million litres of beerIn France, a country with more than 2,000 breweries, the Brewery Union said 10 million litres of beer — equivalent to four Olympic-sized swimming pools — would have to be destroyed after the cancellation of all major events before September due to the pandemic. "Brewers think it will be too late in June or July to consume their beers brewed last winter … they prefer to collect and destroy the products for a best guarantee of quality," brewery union Brasseurs de France said in a statement. Europe's largest beer-producing nation, Germany, saw most of its 9,700 annual beer-related festivals cancelled, leaving many breweries on the verge of ruin. The world's biggest beer festival — Oktoberfest, celebrated in Munich since 1810 — saw visitors drink 7.8 million litres of beer in 2019, but not this year. Press spokesman for the German Brewers' Association Marc-Oliver Huhnholz said the pandemic had a dramatic impact on the country's 1,500 breweries. "The situation worsens every day … the total damage for breweries is still not yet foreseeable," Mr Huhnholz said. "We still see a fatal domino effect: the conflagration in gastronomy is spreading to the brewing industry. "We share the assessment of the German HOTREC [hospitality association]: without additional government aid, irreparable economic damage is at risk … many breweries will not survive this existential crisis without emergency aid."Centuries-old brewery to shut downAmid the first losses due to the coronavirus crisis is one of Germany's oldest breweries. Operating since 1617, the family-owned Wernecker Bierbrauerei in Bavaria, which survived a revolution, crisis and two world wars, had to give up the fight. The brewery's closure in September will not only have an enormous impact on the family and its 26 employees but will also take away part of local history and tradition in the small town of Werneck in the brewery-rich state of Bavaria. Family member and brewery manager Christine Lang said the decision to stop brewing was heartbreaking. "The brewery is not just a job for us. It's our passion, it's part of our identity that falls away and it is very painful to see that," Ms Lang said. The family business lost most of its revenue overnight when coronavirus restrictions were put in place. Ms Lang said they decided to continue running the business until September in the hope of selling all of its beer. "We don't know yet if we have to destroy some of our beer. It hurts our hearts but we hope it can find its way to the beer lovers," she said.
Hordes of young Australians are abandoning their private health insurance policies after the coronavirus pandemic left health funds charging people for services many could no longer use. Key points:Data shows about 11,000 people aged between 25 and 29 abandoned private health insuranceDrop coincides with the introduction of Government restrictions on services because of COVID-19Consumer advocates say nothing has been done to address people's concerns with sectorIn the first glimpse of the impact of the crisis on the private health insurance industry, the latest data shows almost 11,200 people aged between 25 and 29 dumped their private health insurance in the three months to March 31. While there were increases in cover among some Australians, such as people aged between 70 to 79, overall the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) statistics showed about 9,800 Australians dropped their private health cover over the three month-period, as restrictions set in and the economic consequences of the pandemic began to hit. The trend of young people fleeing the sector has been a continuing concern for those within the industry and the Government, who fear the healthcare system could find itself in a "death spiral" if young and healthy people continue to abandon cover. The fall in policies coincided with the introduction of the Government's coronavirus restrictions, and the subsequent economic consequences of the pandemic. Consumer group CHOICE said the full impact of the crisis on the rate of private health insurance coverage would be seen in next quarter's statistics, with the latest data only taking into account the beginning of the pandemic. But CHOICE health campaigner Dean Price said even before COVID-19, the statistics were dire. "It's no wonder — nothing has been done to address people's concerns that private health insurance costs too much, is too confusing and offers too little value," he said. The coronavirus pandemic saw the Government put a stop to all "non-urgent" elective surgeries to conserve valuable resources like personal protective equipment (PPE) and help the health system prepare for an anticipated influx of patients. Some routine services like dental and eye care were also cancelled, as clinics prioritised urgent cases or shut down all together. It meant health funds were charging people for services many were no longer using. The APRA statistics showed, as a result, there was an almost 8 per cent decrease in hospital treatment benefits compared to the last quarter, while total benefits for medical specialties were also down about 8 per cent. To keep the COVID-19 outbreak under control we need to keep growth factor below 1.0Private Health Care Australia chief executive officer Rachel David said if the drop in benefits paid meant health funds were sitting on additional profits, they would look to pass that onto members. "Health funds gave a commitment that any additional funds resulting from COVID-19 related restrictions causing cancellation of some elective surgery and some allied health services would be returned to members," Dr David said. She said now the Government had given the green light for elective surgeries to resume, the industry was bracing for a surge in claims. "Health funds must remain well capitalised and prudentially sound throughout and beyond the COVID-19 crisis to fund the backlog of elective surgeries and allied health benefits," Dr David said. Health funds have acted to soften the financial blow of COVID-19, delaying a scheduled premium increase and reducing or cancelling waiting periods for people to make claims. But CHOICE reignited calls for a review into the system, accusing the industry of dragging its feet in passing on profits to consumers. "Policies that were poor value before COVID-19 have only become worse value as the industry dithers on returning their unexpected windfalls back to their customers," Mr Price said. "The Australian Government must review the whole system by undertaking a thorough public inquiry."
China's embassy in Canberra says it is a joke for Australia to claim it has been vindicated by international support for a coronavirus inquiry. Key points:The World Health Assembly agreed to an inquiry in Geneva on Tuesday nightThe idea of an independent probe was pushed by Australia, but some aspects have been watered downThe Chinese embassy said the inquiry would be "totally different" to what Australia wantedAustralia was the second country, after the United States, to call for an independent inquiry into the global pandemic, a move which sparked a diplomatic row with China. But last night, at a meeting of the World Health Assembly (WHA) in Geneva, China indicated it would likely back a European Union motion that called for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive" evaluation of the response to the global outbreak. More than 100 countries, including Australia, had already co-signed the motion for the probe into the global outbreak. The motion then passed at the WHA gathering on Tuesday night. Some Coalition MPs and senators have been cheered by the broad international support for the inquiry, with former Cabinet minister Matt Canavan saying Australia had been "massively vindicated" by the "outpouring of support from other countries in the world". But Beijing's embassy in Canberra issued a statement saying the inquiry being considered by the WHA was "totally different" to the one Australia proposed and to claim vindication was "nothing but a joke". "A close look at the draft itself can easily come to such a conclusion," the embassy said in a statement. "All those who know the consultation process that led to the resolution understand this. "To claim the WHA's resolution a vindication of Australia's call is nothing but a joke."The skirmish came after China imposed an 80 per cent tariff on Australian barley overnight, all but killing a lucrative market for exporters. China's ambassador to Australia had previously warned there could be trade ramifications if the Federal Government pursued its bid for an investigation into the origins of coronavirus. Australia's initial inquiry bid watered downAustralia initially demanded that the inquiry be led by an organisation outside the World Health Organization (WHO), with Foreign Marise Payne saying it "strikes me as a bit poacher and gamekeeper". Australia has backed away — at least for now — from its call to hand WHO officials the same powers as weapons inspectors. But the Government argues that Australian officials worked hard to toughen up the language in the draft motion so it specifically says the inquiry must be impartial and independent. The Government also points out that the draft motion states the WHO should investigate the source of the virus, as well as how the virus jumped from animals to humans. Trade Minister Simon Birmingham called the embassy's comment "provocative" but said Australia would not engage in "cheap politicking" over COVID-19. "I would have thought the appropriate response from China's ambassador would be to welcome these outcomes and welcome the opportunity for us to work together on this important issue," he told Sky News. Senator Canavan said the stoush demonstrated why Australia would "need to move away from relying so much on China". "The conduct of the Chinese Government over this period, but also the last few years, has been hard to predict," he said. "It's an increased risk for Australian business. We have to work very hard to establish relationships with other countries."
Almost 10 weeks into the pandemic, COVID-19 is continuing to surprise and baffle health experts. In fact, experts' picture of exactly how COVID-19 might play out in the body is now quite different to what was thought as little as a few weeks ago, with some experts saying it could be better described as three different diseases. We have known for a while that the mild to moderate form of the disease — a flu-like illness with fever, muscle aches and respiratory symptoms, or often no symptoms at all — is almost like "child's play" compared to the major damage to organs like the the lungs, heart, brain, and kidneys seen when COVID-19 becomes severe. Umesh Gidwani, head of cardiac intensive care at New York's Mount Sinai Hospital, says that trying to treat the severe form of the disease is like facing a terrifying fire, burning out of control. "The patients we take care of [in intensive care] are those in whom the fire has already destroyed the house. But there continues to be embers and small fires. I can't enter the house because it's too hot and things are falling on me," he says. "[Severe disease] is almost a completely different animal [compared] to someone who is recovering at home with some chicken soup and paracetamol". And now it seems there is evidence of a third variation in illness that can occur following exposure to the virus — a mysterious new disease given the name paediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome, with an entirely different set of symptoms again. The syndrome seems to only affect children, unlike both mild and severe COVID-19, which mostly affect adults. However the link between the inflammatory syndrome and the virus that causes COVID-19 is not yet 100 per cent confirmed. The bottom line, says Dr Gidwani, is what we have been calling a single disease — COVID-19 — is really looking more like three separate diseases. He and others draw this conclusion based on how the virus affects the immune system. "The key disaster is the extent and severity of the immune response," he says. It is now clear the symptoms experienced by people with severe COVID-19 are largely caused by the body's disordered immune response to the virus rather than the virus itself, Dr Gidwani says. In fact, the disordered immune response in severe COVID-19 is the disease; they are one and the same thing. In contrast, with mild to moderate COVID, the immune response is more measured, with symptoms largely confined to the upper respiratory tract. But with severe COVID-19, the body's response to the infection goes into overdrive. In particular, substances called cytokines, which tell other parts of the immune system there is a problem that needs fixing in the body, and which coordinate the immune response, are released in excessive amounts. This creates what's known as a "cytokine storm", which ends up causing damage to healthy tissue. Doctors have seen similar cytokine storms in people with different kinds of infections or with certain cancers. But the cytokine storm with COVID-19 is wildly different. As a result, therapies that work for the other cytokine storms don't control the problem, Dr Gidwani says. "My brain is thinking 'what is going on? Is there a way to fix this?' I don't know what to do," he says. "It is very challenging, very frustrating, very upsetting."'This is a brand new disease'Understanding what makes the cytokine storm unique in severe COVID-19 is important as it means there may need to be a different approaching to helping patients get better. "This is a brand new disease. We are seeing more and more that the therapies we are used to working with don't necessarily produce the same results with COVID," Dr Gidwani says. One important difference is that the cytokine storm in severe COVID-19 results in widespread blood clotting, which can in turn trigger heart attacks, strokes, deep vein thrombosis (DVT), pulmonary embolisms (clots in veins in the lungs) and limbs so damaged they may need to be amputated. This can lead doctors to misjudge how sick a patient is and withdraw supportive measures such as a ventilator before they should. "It is important to realise this is a distinct [immune] syndrome and that you can therefore avoid certain pitfalls," says Dr Gidwani. "This is not what we expected at the outset. "But we never knew what to expect. I don't know what will happen next either."Over-activation of the immune system could be a major "unifying element" that explains a large part of why the disease can play out in such different ways in severe COVID-19 and in PMIS, says Australian cardiologist and blood vessel researcher Jason Kovacic. An immune attack on blood vessels potentially explains many of the key dangerous features of both conditions, says Dr Kovacic, who is Professor of Medicine and Cardiology both at New York's Icahn School of Medicine and the Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute at the University of NSW.
This story will be regularly updated throughout Wednesday. Wednesday's key moments:US seeks to end dependence on other countries for pharmaceutical drugsThe UK to face a 'severe recession' as official death tolls tops 35,000Formula One says quarantine exemptions must be provided for elite sportsSweden tops Europe COVID-19 deaths per capitaMike Pompeo called Taiwan a reliable partner prior of President Tsai Ing-Wen's swearing-inUS seeks to end dependence on other countries for pharmaceuticalsUnited States President Donald Trump's administration awarded a contract worth up to $US812 million ($1.2 billion) for a new US company to manufacture drugs and drug ingredients to fight COVID-19 on American soil, aiming to end dependence on other countries. The announcement comes as the US records more than 90,000 deaths and 1.5 million confirmed cases of the coronavirus, according to figures by Johns Hopkins University. The administration has been looking to build up the ability to produce drugs and their raw materials in the US after the global pandemic exposed the industry's dependence on China and India for its supply chain. The US Department of Health and Human Services said that it had awarded a 4-year, $US354 million contract to privately-held Phlow Corp to make COVID-19 drugs, other essential drugs and their ingredients. The contract can be extended for up to $US812 million over 10 years. Phlow said all pharmaceutical products will be made in the US and the contract will help it contribute to a national stockpile of active pharmaceutical ingredients for essential medicines. UK deaths top 35,000 but thousands more feared dead from COVID-19The death toll from coronavirus has topped 35,000 in Britain according to official government figures, but that figure could be closer to 45,000 according to the UK's Office for National Statistics (ONS). The rise was an increase of 545 on the figure provided on Monday. The official government figures, which come from the Department of Health and Social Care, differ from the ONS numbers as the include only people who died who had previously tested positive for COVID-19, whereas the ONS numbers include all suspected coronavirus deaths. Tuesday's numbers from the ONS paint a grim picture in care homes, more than a third of which have been stricken by COVID-19. Deaths in care homes across the United Kingdom topped 10,000 as of May 8, although the increase has slowed over the last couple of weeks. "Deaths in all settings including care homes are falling … but we need to do all we can to continue to protect the most vulnerable in our care homes," a spokesman for Prime Minster Boris Johnson said. Meanwhile the UK's treasurer warned parliament there would not be an immediate bounce-back for the nation's struggling economy as Britain recorded its highest number of people claiming unemployment benefits since 1996. "It is not obvious that there will be an immediate bounce-back," Chancellor of the Exchequer Rishi Sunak told the House of Commons, saying the retail sector, for example, would still face restrictions when it reopens. "We are likely to face a severe recession the likes of which we have never seen," he said. "In all cases, it will take a little bit of time for things to get back to normal, even once we have reopened currently closed sectors."The UK has been in lockdown since March 23 but some workers were asked to return to work last week. British F1 GP under threatFormula One said the UK Government's quarantine plans would rule out a British Grand Prix and affect tens of thousands of F1-related jobs if exemptions are not granted for sport. Ministers said they plan a 14-day quarantine for most people arriving in the country in the coming weeks to try to prevent a second peak in the COVID-19 pandemic. Formula One is planning two Grands Prix without spectators at Silverstone, which this year marks the 70th anniversary of hosting the first world championship race, immediately after two in Austria in early July. Seven of the 10 Formula One teams are based in England and plans for the season, which has yet to start due to the pandemic, would be disrupted by teams being forced into two weeks' quarantine every time they return from abroad. "A 14-day quarantine would make it impossible to have a British Grand Prix this year," a Formula One spokesperson said. "It has a major impact on literally tens of thousands of jobs linked to F1 and the supply chains. If all elite sport is to return to TV, then exemptions must be provided."WHO chief says he will keep leading virus response after US threatThe World Health Organization's head said he would keep leading the global fight against the coronavirus pandemic, after US President Donald Trump threatened to cut off funding and quit the body. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus defended the agency's role after the US again withheld full support for a resolution on the pandemic. "We want accountability more than anyone," Dr Tedros told a virtual meeting of the WHO'S 194 member states. "We will continue providing strategic leadership to coordinate the global response."The WHO declined to comment on Mr Trump's threat to quit the international organisation, saying only that it had received his letter and was considering its contents. Washington allowed the resolution calling for a review into the global response to the pandemic to pass by consensus, but said it objected to language about reproductive health rights and permission for poor countries to waive patent rules. The US mission in Geneva said in a statement that paragraphs on the right of poor countries to waive patents to obtain medicine during a health emergency would "send the wrong message to innovators" trying to produce new drugs and vaccines. They added that the WHO's reproductive healthcare language could be interpreted as requiring countries to permit abortion. "The United States believes in legal protections for the unborn," it said. Sweden tops Europe COVID-19 deaths per capitaSweden, which has opted for a more open strategy in combating the virus than other European countries, has the highest number of deaths in Europe per capita from the COVID-19 disease over the last seven days, data showed. Sweden has kept most schools, restaurant and businesses open during the pandemic. While deaths are on the decline, Sweden had 6.25 deaths per million inhabitants per day in a rolling seven-day average between May 12 and May 19, according to Ourworldinsata.org. That was the highest in Europe and just above the United Kingdom, which had 5.75 deaths per million. Over the course of the pandemic Sweden still has fewer deaths per capita than the United Kingdom, Spain, Italy, Belgium and France, which have all opted for lockdowns, but much higher than Nordic neighbours Denmark, Norway and Finland. Sweden's strategy, mostly based on voluntary measures regarding social distancing and basic hygiene, has been criticised by some as a dangerous experiment with peoples lives, but also been put forward as a future model by the WHO. Sweden's open strategy seems to have softened the blow on the economy, with growth shrinking much less than in Denmark and Norway in the first quarter. Wuhan tests more than 400,000 people for COVID-19 in one dayThe city of Wuhan, the original epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak in China, conducted 467,847 nucleic acid tests on one day in May 18, a local health authority said. The staggering number is up from the 335,887 tests a day earlier. Wuhan kicked off a campaign to test all of its 11 million residents last week to look for asymptomatic carriers — infected people who show no outward sign of illness. On May 9-10, the city confirmed its first cluster of COVID-19 infections since it reopened from a 76-day lockdown in April. Mike Pompeo praises Taiwan's coronavirus responseUnited States Secretary of State Mike Pompeo congratulated Taiwan's President Tsai Ing-Wen on her re-election, praised the country's coronavirus response and called it a reliable partner. "We have a shared vision for the region — one that includes rule of law, transparency, prosperity, and security for all," Mr Pompeo said in a statement. His statement sharply contrasted recent US criticisms of China, which claims Taiwan as a province. Since the coronavirus was discovered in China's Wuhan province less than six months ago, tensions have mounted between the United States and its trade-war foe China. "The recent COVID-19 pandemic provided an opportunity for the international community to see why Taiwan's pandemic-response model is worthy of emulation," Mr Pompeo said. China views Ms Tsai, who will be sworn into office for her second and final term on Wednesday (local time), as a separatist bent on formal independence for Taiwan. At her inauguration, Ms Tsai is expected to say that Taiwan will seek to "actively participate" in international bodies and deepen its cooperation with like-minded countries, generally a reference to the United States and its allies. Spaniards to change habits post lockdownSpain lifted a ban on direct flights and ships from Italy but maintained a block on cruise ships, as a survey showed the coronavirus outbreak had put locals off travelling. A reduced death rate from COVID-19 has encouraged Spain, with the world's fourth-highest number of infections, to begin easing one of Europe's strictest lockdowns. But the tourism-dependent economy is likely to have to wait until late June to welcome holidaymakers back. Madrid surprised its European partners by introducing a two-week quarantine last week. In Barcelona, people living within a kilometre of a beach will be allowed to sunbathe on the sand from Wednesday (local time). The pandemic has become Spaniards' biggest worry, and most of them plan to change habits when they are free to move, according to a poll by the Government's Centre for Sociological Studies. Just 14 per cent of those surveyed said they planned to travel abroad when the lockdown is lifted. Big purchases are on hold — only 4.2 per cent were thinking about buying a new car and 3.4 per cent a house. Bars and restaurants will have to coax back the 30 per cent of people who said they preferred not to eat outside their homes.
The World Health Assembly has formally adopted a resolution calling for an independent review into the handling of the coronavirus pandemic. Key points:Australia was vocal in calling for the independent review, straining relations with BeijingDespite initial doubt, China added its name to the resolution before it passedThe review will investigate the global response to the pandemicDelegates applauded when the draft resolution passed without objection at a meeting in Geneva. Australia was among the nations to call for an independent probe, which put a strain on relations with Beijing. Foreign Minister Marise Payne said Australia welcomed the news. "The resolution commits to an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation into COVID-19, at the earliest appropriate moment, to review the lessons learned from the international health response coordinated by the World Health Organization (WHO)," she said. "Australia will continue to be a consistent and constructive voice in the international community to advance and protect our national interest and the global interest."Health Minister Greg Hunt, who addressed the assembly on Monday, said he was "delighted" with the passing of the motion. Delighted that the WHA Assembly has passed by consensus the Motion calling for an impartial, independent & comprehensive examination of the global response to COVID-19. China ultimately agreed to co-sponsor the resolution, adding its name to the document shortly before it was adopted. Chinese President Xi Jinping had earlier declared his country would support a review led by the World Health Organization, but only once the virus was brought under control. That led to some Australian Government MPs and senators claiming vindication for Australia's position. But Beijing's embassy in Canberra issued a statement saying the inquiry being considered by the WHA was "totally different" to the one Australia proposed, saying that to claim vindication was "nothing but a joke". "A close look at the draft itself can easily come to such a conclusion," the embassy said in a statement. During a media conference on Tuesday evening, China's foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said Australia's advocacy for the probe was improper. "China has stated its stand multiple times about Australia's independent probe on the epidemic," he said. "We firmly oppose political manoeuvring on the epidemic. "In fact, this kind of action isn't proper, won't win people's hearts and won't succeed."
Dr Charlotte Hespe was upset when she saw acquaintances circulating emails that promoted bogus coronavirus prevention measures. To make it worse, the information claimed to be from an infectious disease expert when it wasn't. In her Sydney general practice, visitors have requested prescriptions for hydroxychloroquine — the anti-malarial drug promoted by US President Donald Trump as a treatment for coronavirus, despite a lack of evidence for it working. Key points:Patients are coming to doctors with misunderstandings and asking for unproven treatmentsIn a health crisis this can be a particular challenge for doctors, some of whom are themselves being put at riskSome experts say the problem is fed by uncertainty about the disease as well as sensational media and online networksHealthcare workers across the country are dealing with a global contagion of online misinformation and confusion about COVID-19, as well as the pandemic itself. Some experts say this is fed by uncertainty about the disease and people's understandable need for concrete information that will keep friends and family safe. But at their worst, such misunderstandings or falsehoods can put health workers and institutions dangerously in the spotlight. For example, in early April, the NSW Nurses and Midwives' Association reported workers were being told by hospital administrators not to wear their uniforms to work after incidents of abuse by people who believed they were spreading the virus. There have been reports of Victorian staff being racially profiled. Hospitals have also been targeted. In the United States, and to a much lesser extent in Australia, people who claim the crisis is exaggerated or invented have encouraged their followers to film health facilities. Dr Vyom Sharma, a general practitioner in Melbourne, said he's most concerned about people who may still doubt the importance of hygiene and social distancing. "The grand irony is that because we've done so well [in Australia] that people don't see how horrific the consequences are," he said. "I don't see us winning this war on misinformation right now. Despite all the things Australia has done well, the one place we have always been behind [in] is the information battle."The risks of unproven treatments and early researchWhile Facebook, Twitter and YouTube now promote links to the World Health Organization and local health bodies, these messages compete in the newsfeed against misinformation or sensational news reports that are often more emotional and engaging, and thus more shareable. For Dr Hespe, medical research from early studies that have not been peer reviewed has been the greatest challenge. She's fielded questions about the impact of pain killers and anti-inflammatory drugs on COVID-19, off the back of early studies regarding ibuprofen and other drugs that have been widely distributed. The patients who asked her for hydroxychloroquine, meanwhile, had been advised by relatives. "They had younger family members who'd heard about it, done some basic research and decided that dad should have it, and so sent dad to have the conversation with the GP," she said. A French study that explored the use of the anti-malarial drug, which was tweeted by President Trump, has had almost 54,000 Facebook interactions according data from the monitoring platform Crowdtangle — an extraordinary number for a relatively dry medical journal paper that has since come under scrutiny by the journal's publishers. Dr Hespe said the media must understand the potential impact when discussing possible COVID-19 treatments that are still unproven. "Not over-promising and under-delivering, even though it's exciting in a news sense," she said. How to talk about conspiracy theoriesDr Chris Moy, the Australian Medical Association's South Australian president, suspects people who have embraced more extreme ideas about COVID-19 — that it was caused by 5G or even Bill Gates — may be unlikely to seek medical care. As a GP in Adelaide, he said he sees patients who don't necessarily believe such theories themselves, but have close relatives who do and are struggling with how to address this lack of shared reality. Of course, scientists are still learning about the disease and how best to treat it — a difficult reality when people want clear, actionable information now to protect themselves and their families. "It is the right mix for a lot of misinformation to happen, but the flip side is, the main messages did get through in the end," he said. Patient autonomy is a "bedrock" of contemporary medicine, said Connal Lee, a health ethicist at the University of South Australia. He suggested medical professionals should understand a patient's experience and start a conversation if they seem doubtful about the doctor's recommendation. "We have seen how a harmful side of misinformation can and does emerge — recently in Melbourne and in the US there have been protests and gatherings that flout the rules and put others in danger," Dr Lee said. "The problem with certain conspiracy groups is that no matter how we respond, it simply feeds into the theory, so we need to be mindful that intervention will not always be successful."A danger to the patient, and the communityDr Sharma in Melbourne is concerned about the risk patients may pose to others if they consume and act on misinformation — as well as the health workers that will treat them if they become ill. He has dealt with the perception among some patients that COVID-19 is a mild illness, for example, just like a cold or flu. "This has the sum total effect of … people just not getting tested," he said. "It informs people's decisions to not socially distance or [to] be much more lax with it."He encourages patients to "fact check" with official sources when they see questionable health information circulating on platforms like WeChat. Dr Sharma agrees with Dr Lee that it's important to make time for a conversation with patients about any contentious views, but the need to do this is even more urgent with COVID-19. Time matters. It's not just the patient's wellbeing at stake if they believe COVID-19 isn't that dangerous or that staying home isn't important, it's about the community's health. "There's a huge asymmetry here," Dr Sharma said. "The risk that an individual poses to the community as a link in the chain of transmission is actually much greater than the risk to themselves."
You might try to ignore it at first: Your aunt's YouTube videos about how coronavirus is a bioweapon. The former workmate forwarding 5G conspiracy theories on WhatsApp. The pandemic has quickly changed everything — we're confined to our homes, glued to our screens — and among some families and friends, the virus has also fractured a shared sense of what is fact, what is true. Sarah's* father sends her links to websites full of jumbled ideas and misrepresented data. He doubts how dangerous the disease is, and because he's in his 70s, she fears for his safety. "It floored me initially," she says. "He was telling us he was off to do the shopping...still wanting to visit [his family], still wanting us to visit him."She won't let the rabbit holes he goes down derail their relationship, but she longs, during this often dismal and anxious moment, to be on the same page. Imagine vaccines, for example, not just in terms of how they affect our individual body, but also in how they affect "the collective body of a community", as Eula Biss wrote in her book, On Immunity. This means we can be quick to anger when faced with misinformation about infectious disease, suggests Julie Leask, a professor at the University of Sydney's Faculty of Medicine and Health, who has researched anti-vaccination views and how to respond to them. "The way someone thinks and acts on an infectious disease doesn't just affect them, it affects the health of other people," Dr Leask says. Cutting tiesIt can be easy to dismiss coronavirus conspiracy theorists, with their janky YouTube videos and Facebook tirades, but if we want to talk to family and friends who have been persuaded, we must first understand their appeal. Dr Leask describes it as "causal hunger" — the desire to know, where did this illness come from and how can I fight it?"People develop folk tales around disease causation, to make sense of it and find a path for prevention," she says. Sharing conspiracy theories can also be a way for someone to signal who they are — that they are suspicious of authority, or conservative or progressive — suggests Nick Enfield, who heads the Sydney Initiative for Truth at Sydney University. "If there is already some kind of disagreement or rift or difference of ideology or identity … often that's exactly how that comes to the surface," Professor Enfield says. And while these theories may be ignored at Christmas dinner, during a pandemic, some families feel pushed to take a stand. Fiona, 41, and her partner have found themselves avoiding her mother-in-law and her partner over their beliefs about the virus, which she feels have grown more extreme. While she knew her mother-in-law was anti-vaccination, they never really talked about it and maintained a good relationship. The coronavirus outbreak has taken the brakes off. Many of her mother-in-law's beliefs seem to have emerged from YouTube, where hawkers of conspiracy theories that claim social distancing and 5G are means of totalitarian government control have found an audience. "When they're listening to these people on YouTube, it does feel like they belong to a movement or almost like religion," Fiona says. The decision to pause her daughter's visits with her mother-in-law was profoundly difficult, but she and her partner were worried their five-year-old might become frightened by what her grandmother shared about vaccines or the virus. "My daughter misses seeing her nanna," she says. "Because it's toxic, the whole conversation. In order to remove that toxicity, it means that you miss out on the good stuff."Triaging for othersTatiana Ikasovic, 28, an Australian actor in Los Angeles, tries to triage the explosion of coronavirus misinformation she's seen from family and friends on Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp. She makes decisions each day about how to react. If it's an older person, she might be more sympathetic — perhaps they're not familiar with YouTube and aren't sure how to distinguish trustworthy sources from untrustworthy. Often she reminds herself that she doesn't know why people hold particular viewpoints — whether there is a personal reason they're distrustful of authorities. But it bothers her most when young people who haven't been affected by the virus, who are "just on the internet all day", share posts claiming the virus isn't real or that it's the government's attempt to implement a fascist system. "I find that incredibly disrespectful to people who have known people who have died from this illness, and to healthcare workers," Tatiana says. Have you seen something about coronavirus that doesn't seem right?False stamp over social media appsIf something pops up in your feeds or inboxes, please help us by uploading screenshots, photos, videos or links, and tell us how it got to you. She suggests trying to find common ground where possible even if they are "a dead-set true believer". "It's different if they're acting in a way that's harmful to you, or your family or other people," she says. But we shouldn't only be concerned about the people who believe in conspiracy theories, but those who might be exposed to them. If you have an audience among your family on a Zoom call or in Facebook comments, for example, Dr Leask says it can be important to debunk information "quickly, calmly and respectfully". She advises checking where someone first heard the conspiracy theory, about 5G causing the virus, for example, and gauging their strength of belief. If they seem to be simply testing out a theory, you could respond with personalised language along the lines of: "from what I can see, it looks like COVID-19 was caused by a virus passed from humans and that it passes from person to person."Her research on anti-vaccination beliefs suggests it is best to "be brief, be factual, be evidence informed, don't shoot from the hip". Hydroxychloroquine, ibuprofen and blood typeWhat's the verdict on these health myths?Australians are being asked to be on a "team", to stay at home for the public good, but this assumes we share a set of beliefs about the danger of the disease and trust in authorities. Coronavirus is remarkably new and our understanding of it evolves every day, making it even harder for some people to establish a common set of facts with friends and family. Fiona just wants a way to help her relatives out of the YouTube vortex. When they send her videos about vaccination and the pandemic, it seems to come from a place of genuine concern and fear for her health, and the health of her daughter. "I feel like I'm helpless in even helping them, because I think it's so sad they're so distressed by it all," she says. "I'd love to come to them with some stuff, and say 'hey, stop stressing yourselves out, these are the actual facts'."While social media allows what were once fringe ideas to become easily accessible, Dr Enright says we should also remember that broadly they remain marginal overall. "The responsibility is partly on all of us to try and help develop that culture of understanding... and to understand science better than we do," he says. "To have respect for it, and be happy to change our position."
As the coronavirus pandemic continues a dominate global politics, another health entity has entered the discussion. While the World Health Organization (WHO) has been the focus of the fight against COVID-19, Federal Health Minister Greg Hunt has highlighted the World Health Assembly (WHA) as a focus in the near future. The WHA does not get a lot of publicity, but it could become significant in global politics in the coming days. What is the WHA?The WHA is an annual meeting of all 194 members of the WHO. The assembly is held every May, with delegates from each nation travelling to the Swiss city of Geneva to meet and make decisions on global health, according to the WHO website. This year's event will be the 73rd edition of the assembly, but due to coronavirus, it will be held online. It will be held on May 18-19 — so tonight and Tuesday night, Australian time. According to the WHO website, COVID-19 will take up the majority of the discussion. There are several objectives at each assembly. Making decisions about global health issues is the main objective. These decisions are important because they will direct the policies of the WHO for the next 12 months. Decisions are ordinarily dictated by the WHA executive board, a group of 34 health professionals appointed to the role. Dr Lisa Studdert is Australia's representative on the executive board. Members also elect a president and five vice-presidents of the WHA for the next year. Why is the WHA in the news?Australia, along with other countries including the United States, has called for an independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus pandemic. The WHA meeting will consider a motion, drafted by the European Union, calling for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of the "international health response to COVID-19". Mr Hunt is expecting around 120 other nations to back that call. Calls for an inquiry have angered China, which has started a trade dispute with Australia. Chinese media is reporting that President Xi Jinping will deliver a speech at the WHA opening ceremony, at the invitation of WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. The United States has not said if it will back the motion. The ABC understands that United States diplomats are pressing for tougher language that calls for a probe into how the virus started in China. But Australian diplomats do not expect the US to vote against the motion as it stands. US President Donald Trump has repeatedly accused China of covering up the outbreak and allow coronavirus to spread around the world. Has there been any other news about the WHA?The island of roughly 23 million will again not have a seat at the table when the assembly starts. As it is considered part of China, Taiwan is represented by delegates from Beijing. But Taiwan wants a seat at the table and has attended as an observer in the past. Taiwan's Foreign Ministry earlier this month complained that official coronavirus data and prevention methods it had provided to the WHO were not being shared with the international body's member states. World leaders including Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and Canada's Justin Trudeau have called for WHO to grant Taiwan full membership. The US State Department has campaigned for the WHO to allow Taiwan a place at the table. Australia, too, backs Taiwan joining the organisation, but only as an observer. Today Reuters reported that Taiwan was shelving its push for observer status in order to allow the WHA to focus on the coronavirus issue. "Despite all our efforts and an unprecedented level of international support, Taiwan has not received an invitation to take part," Foreign Minister Joseph Wu told reporters. "The Ministry of Foreign Affairs expresses deep regret and strong dissatisfaction that the World Health Organization Secretariat has yielded to pressure from the Chinese government and continues to disregard the right to health of the 23 million people of Taiwan."
Two more cases of coronavirus are being investigated at Victorian nursing homes in addition to the case reported at the Villa Maria aged care facility in Bundoora on Monday. Key points:Two residents at aged care facilities in Caulfield and Camberwell have tested positive to coronavirusVilla Maria aged care went into lockdown on Monday after a resident there became a suspected coronavirus caseMiCare's aged care facility at Kilsyth has also entered lockdown as it awaits test results for two residents with flu-like symptomsDeputy Chief Health Officer Annaliese van Diemen said seven new cases of the virus had been recorded in the state since Monday, including two in separate aged care homes. Dr van Diemen said one of the aged care cases was a resident at Lynden Aged Care in Camberwell in Melbourne's east. "The resident is being treated in isolation in a metropolitan hospital," Dr van Diemen said. "Residents and families have been informed by the facility."She said cleaning and contact tracing was already underway. The second case at an aged care facility was a resident at HammondCare's dementia care facility in Caulfield, she said. "A subsequent test has come back negative for that case but we treat all positive cases as positive cases and we don't take any chances," she said. Both aged care facilities will remain closed to visitors for 14 days as a precaution. "At this point in time we don't have a source for the infections at the current facilities so that's why the extensive investigations will continue in the coming days," Dr van Diemen said. Meanwhile, aged care facilities at Kilsyth in Melbourne's east have entered lockdown while they await coronavirus test results for two residents suffering flu-like symptoms. In a statement, MiCare said one resident of its Margriet Manor facility and another at its neighbouring facility Overbeek Lodge were being given special care in isolation while they awaited test results. MiCare said it had tested about a dozen residents for COVID-19 since the pandemic began and all results to date had been negative. The total number of coronavirus cases in Victoria now stands at 1,573, a net increase of six after a previous case was removed due to "reclassification". A statement from the Chief Health Officer said one new case was linked the Cedar Meats outbreak, bringing the total for that cluster to 100, including 64 staff and 36 close contacts. One new case was a returned traveller in hotel quarantine, while three more were under investigation. There were no further cases linked to the McDonald's Fawkner outbreak, with the total number of cases in that cluster remaining at 12. HammondCare senior nurse Angela Raguz said in a statement earlier that further testing was underway and the facility had been placed into lockdown. "HammondCare is treating the result as if it is positive and taking all precautions," Ms Raguz said. She said the resident who tested positive for coronavirus lived in the same cottage as 11 other residents. HammondCare had deployed its outbreak management plan which included additional staff resources and was working closely with the Victorian Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), she said. "Our plan is that there will be information available to families at any time, day or night," Ms Raguz said. "As residents of this home may live with dementia we are especially mindful of their specific needs in what is a challenging time for all residents and staff."Villa Maria aged care in Bundoora went into lockdown after a resident there became a suspected coronavirus case over the weekend. Health authorities initially said the resident was one of Monday's new coronavirus cases but later said the resident had returned an "inconclusive" result that was being treated as positive as a precaution. The home's operator, Villa Maria Catholic Homes (VMCH), said on Monday the entire home was in lockdown as a result and the resident, who had no symptoms, was quarantined in their room. McDonald's distribution centre cleaned following delivery driver's positive testA McDonald's distribution centre in Melbourne has also been closed as a precaution after a delivery driver tested positive for coronavirus. A dozen McDonald's restaurants across Melbourne's north and west closed on Monday due to the positive case, with hundreds of staff asked to self-isolate. A McDonald's Australia spokesman said the company closed the distribution centre last night to conduct a deep clean. He said it was a precautionary measure only and the distribution centre was scheduled to re-open on Tuesday. State Government support for university sector announcedEarlier, the State Government announced a support package for Victoria's university sector, which is struggling to stay afloat during the coronavirus pandemic. Minister for Higher Education Gayle Tierney said the State Government had created the Victorian Higher Education State Investment Fund to supply $350 million for capital works, research, and industry partnerships for universities. Works will focus on new technology and infrastructure that enables universities to conduct new research, commercialise intellectual property and create high-value jobs. The Government is also offering universities payroll tax deferrals valued at about $110 million, providing immediate relief for universities dealing with a shortfall in funds from the downturn of international student enrolments and other revenue loss as a result of coronavirus. Victorian Government announces $350 million for universities to keep staff employed and find new financial opportunitiesMs Tierney said the fund would "help reduce the number of job losses" in the sector due to COVID-19, but was "not the solution". She said the Federal Government was responsible for funding universities but was "clearly" not doing enough to help the sector. "We would like to see them step up and produce more, because here even in Victoria, we have something like 38,000 people employed in the university sector, we want them to be able to keep their job we want to be able to provide a thriving sector," she said. Treasurer Tim Pallas said the Government had spoken to vice-chancellors about the "profound" challenges they were facing. "It's critically important that we understand universities educate future leaders of society and they also help us conduct critical research and ensure we expand our knowledge base and make our lives that much better," Mr Pallas said. But he also said the Federal Government needed to "do more" to help higher education. "The JobKeeper fund does appear to be substantially overfunded for the demand it is currently getting," he said. "The Commonwealth could do more in this space and it's vitally important we all do as much as we can. "We do need the Commonwealth to do more for this sector, it is hurting and it hurting quite profoundly and will have a dramatic impact upon the long term economic vitality of the state and the nation, on the competitiveness of the nation."The Federal Government has so far committed to allowing universities to keep $18 billion in funding budgeted for domestic students, regardless of any drop in enrolments. It has also offered $100 million in regulatory relief for education providers, but denied the sector's requests for easier access to the JobKeeper scheme and support payments to international students.
If a cute puppy offered online sounds too good to be true, it probably is. Key points:Australians have lost almost $300,000 to puppy scams during the pandemicThe ACCC says online fraudsters offer dogs that don't exist for saleCavoodles and French Bulldogs were the most common breeds in the scamsThat is the message from the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC), which estimates that Australians have lost almost $300,000 to puppy scams during the coronavirus pandemic. Compared to the previous year, Scamwatch recorded a fivefold increase in April for dishonest schemes to extort money out of consumers for dogs that did not exist. "Loneliness was the most widely reported source of personal stress in Australia during April, and in April was when we saw this huge spike in puppy scams," said ACCC Deputy Chair Delia Rickard. How to suss out a puppy scamDo a reverse-image Google search to check if the photo has been posted elsewhere on the internet. Some scammers get around this by altering the imageDo an online search of the seller's email address, which may bring up warnings on other sitesCheck for membership numbers from breeder associationsCheck out the seller's previous web presenceTry to meet the breeder in person and meet the adult dogs"Unfortunately, the rush to get a new pet and the unusual circumstances of COVID-19 makes it harder to work out what's real or a scam."Ms Rickard said Cavoodles and French Bulldogs were the most common breeds reported in the scams. She urged Australians to reverse image search pictures of the puppies and to put the exact words of the advertisement into a search engine before purchasing any dog online to ensure authenticity. Consumers can also check for membership numbers from breeder associations and look back at the seller's previous web presence. Ms Rickard said that while lonely Australians had long been vulnerable to rackets that preyed on their love of animals, their judgement had been further impaired by the enforced isolation of a pandemic. Victorians were the most likely to fall for puppy scams, spending around $115,000, followed by NSW residents who lost almost $98,000. South Australians were the least likely to succumb to the deception of online tricksters. But it is not just Australians who are succumbing to floppy ears and doe eyes, with the UK, US, Canada and South Africa also reporting a spike in canine fraud cases. Space to play or pause, M to mute, left and right arrows to seek, up and down arrows for volume. WATCHDuration: 9 seconds9sPuppy video used in online scam in Melbourne"It's quite an international scam that has been going for a long time," Ms Rickard said. "I guess there's something that just tugs on everyone's heartstrings when they see cute, adorable puppies."But it is more than just potential pet purchases that have seen Australians fleeced since the coronavirus outbreak prompted strict quarantine measures enforced two months ago. How fast is coronavirus growing around the world?Charted growth in key countries, on a logarithmic scale. This chart uses a logarithmic scale to highlight coronavirus growth rates. Read our explainer to understand what that means — and how COVID-19 cases are spreading around the world. As of April, Scamwatch had received more than 2,500 reports of fraud incidents relating to COVID-19, with consumers losing nearly $750,000. Australians have so far lost more than $53 million to all reported scams this year. Delia Rickard of the ACCCACCC's Delia Rickard says consumers' best judgement is sometimes forgotten in the rush for companionship during COVID-19.(Supplied: ACCC)"It's only a small percentage of the scammers that are actually reported to us, so you could multiply that many times to get the true figure," Ms Rickard said. Ms Rickard advised consumers to be sceptical and cynical to avoid being scammed, especially when it came to the online purchase of a furry isolation companion. "Ask yourself: if something's too good to be true, that might be an indication that it's a scam," she said.
As a professor of infectious diseases at Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Paul Garner is well qualified to talk about disease. Key points:Many patients who contract COVID-19 are experiencing effects for many weeksSome are complaining of severe fatigueSt Vincent's Hospital in Sydney is undertaking a 12-month study into the effects of the virusHe also has COVID-19. "It's the worst illness I've ever had," he told 7.30. "I've had dengue. I've had malaria. I've never been as ill as this and it's been really frightening because it's so unpredictable."He is on day 59 since being diagnosed. "The disease comes at you when you least expect it," he said. "You feel quite well and then suddenly in the afternoon it slaps you round the head like a cricket bat. "The length of the illness completely floored me. "You just pray every day that it will go away."Professor Garner is still dealing with exhaustion. "It gives you some of the symptoms that are very similar to chronic fatigue but I am hesitant about calling it that," he said. "If we call it COVID fatigue we know where we are. "I have sympathy for people with chronic fatigue syndrome now, and I believe this disease fast-tracks you into experiencing these symptoms."Professor Garner is just one of thousands discovering how tiring COVID-19 can be. Scientists are still uncovering the deadly secrets of the virus and the long-term impact for those who recover from the disease is yet to be fully understood. In serious cases there are concerns about major organ damage. The World Health Organisation states those with less severe cases of COVID-19 should recover within two weeks, and serious cases could take up to six weeks. But even patients with what are considered mild bouts of the virus, are experiencing fatigue and breathlessness well beyond the suggested recovery period. At Sydney's St Vincent's Hospital, it is hoped a year-long study that is getting underway will provide some answers. A key investigator on the St Vincent's Hospital study is infectious diseases physician, Professor Greg Dore. "What we're interested in is looking at any effects of COVID-19," he told 7.30. "It has a broad spectrum of acute illness from relatively mild upper respiratory type infection symptoms to very severe pneumonia and other organ effects. "We're interested in even the milder cases, whether there is an ongoing effect on people's health, what we call a post viral fatigue; effects on people's exercise tolerance, on neuro-cognitive function, so ability to concentrate. "We know that you can get post viral fatigue with other viruses and glandular fever is probably the classic one, but Ross River fever and other viral illnesses are well known to cause viral fatigue."'How long will it take to recover?'One of the patients taking part in the study is Alex Lewis, who 7.30 met in mid March, shortly after she tested positive for COVID-19. Two months later, she is still struggling. "I was quite fit before but now I don't feel the same way," she told 7.30. "My breathing has continued to get worse and exercise is quite difficult. "And it takes me, I reckon, double the amount of time to recover. "My fatigue, it comes and goes a bit."She is keen to know how long it will take to shake the infection. "We still don't have any definitive answer … I'm quite interested to find out from the study if there is anything more we can know about that," Ms Lewis said. 'A very long recovery'US writer Fiona Lowenstein was diagnosed with COVID-19 in mid-March and is bewildered and anxious about how long her symptoms have lasted. "It's been a very long recovery process and very different from what I expected," she told 7.30. She couldn't find any information about what to expect, so she started a support group, which now has thousands of members around the world. Many have had the same experience as her, feeling weary and unwell long after they thought they'd be better. "I thought I had fully recovered a couple of weeks ago, then I relapsed into some old symptoms, chills and sweats. And this intense feeling of fatigue," she said. "It almost feels like I've been hit by a truck at 4:00pm each day. "It became clear to me that there needed to be a base or community for people suffering from this virus where we could talk through everything. "My inbox was flooded."Ms Lowenstein has now been contacted by thousands of COVID-19 patients from around the world, experiencing similar symptoms to her.
Like a lot of people, Elisabeth Shaw, Chief Executive of Relationships Australia New South Wales, is still trying to figure out how to work effectively while stuck at home. Even for someone who works in the field of relationship counselling, it's no easy task. "This is the problem with being home with the whole family is that I'm trying to find a place where they're not," she says. The last few months have been just as tough for many other people. "Those nearest and dearest to us need to survive this with us," Ms Shaw says. "We don't want people's negative situations to escalate at these times... And so we have to be very careful with each other getting through this. "We want to all be left standing and still be in connection when we get to go back to our normal lives."As a clinical and counselling psychologist who works to enhance relationships within families and their communities, Ms Shaw believes quality relationships are going to be more important now than ever. And she has some suggestions on how we can all continue living and working at home when things get tense. Talking with each otherWith people suddenly forced to spend days or weeks cooped up at home together, it can seem like a challenge to even go the distance without an argument. Listen to the Pineapple ProjectJoin Jan Fran as she explores how to find community and connection amidst coronavirus. A starting point is to work with your strengths, and to acknowledge that coronavirus has disrupted how the household normally works. "If you and your housemates or your partner or your kids don't really talk on an emotional level, absolutely declare it upfront," she says. "If you say, 'Look, I know this feels a bit clunky, but I really want to talk about how I'm feeling.' Then usually everyone relaxes. They could laugh with you, and it's a warm way to be able to talk about some new things in new ways."To get the ball rolling, Ms Shaw says it can help to identify and talk about your own flaws first. "Own your own stuff. Be accountable for what's happening to you. Don't get fixated on why other people are annoying," she says. "Start to look at why you're annoyed and how you might be able to defuse that bomb without waiting for others to change first. "And when you speak about it, say 'Look, I've been irritable this week and I don't think I've handled myself that well at times and I've been reflecting on that.'"That can be a good way to lead by example. If you own your stuff other people might say 'Well look, now you mentioned it I didn't handle it well either.'"In her own life, Ms Shaw finds the end of the day can be the best time to talk, usually on the nightly dog walk. But it's best to pick a time that's not too late, or when everyone is not tired. "I have to find the sweet spot between family members being a bit chilled, and not yet tipped over into exhaustion," she says. "As a mum, I know from a lot of experience that I have a lot of influence (more than I'd like) on the family's mood and resilience. "Many women I speak to agree that they play this role. It can be quite stressful, as it's not always easy to keep it together. "However when I am acting out, and I see the effect on others, I realise I need to pull my head in first, and even agree out loud that I probably started the waterfall of trouble."But it is also worth remembering we can't assume that we'll just remain emotionally even throughout this crisis, Ms Shaw says. "We've got to be tolerant of our own mood changes. It may be from moment to moment, day to day, week to week," she says. "But equally, we have to be aware that everyone we live with is also having those mood changes."A household planAs a way to spark a productive group conversation, Ms Shaw recommends that people develop a household continuity plan to help discuss any problems. "Be proactive," she says. "Call a family meeting or a household meeting and say 'Look let's just draw a line in the sand and review how we've been trapped and what's worked, what's gone a bit pear-shaped.'"The meeting, Ms Shaw says, is an opportunity to name the problems and brainstorm some options. And it should be something that happens once a week or so, to refine the approach. "If you're not proactive now about some of the repeating themes that are already happening, they're only going to keep repeating until they're addressed. At the end of the day, Ms Shaw says it's about being able to work through problems and talk them out. "But the message in all of this is that silence rarely works."
When coronavirus hit Tasmania's communities, councils across the state rushed to help by freezing rates and cutting fees but, with coffers bare and staff stood down, it is becoming clear many councils will be the ones in need of aid. Key points:Tasmania's councils have frozen rates and created hardship packages, but it's meant a huge hit to their bottom lineMany councils are worried about how they'll pay staff and fund servicesThe financial situation has renewed calls for the State Government to reconsider its position on council amalgamationsTheir financial stress has seen renewed calls for the State Government to ditch its policy of voluntary amalgamations and finally force some councils to merge. It was mid-April when Premier Peter Gutwein and Local Government Minister Mark Shelton wrote to councils urging them "to do more". "We strongly encourage all councils to consider their individual packages and provide support to their community as a matter of urgency," they wrote. "It is vital that all councils agree to measures including rate increase freezes and generous hardship policies."The state's councils agreed to implement hardship packages — including delaying rates collections and waiving or deferring fees — and freeze rates for the 20/21 financial year. But not all councils could afford this or agreed with the rates freeze, with some mayors saying they felt forced into doing so. For Flinders Island Council, the rates freeze is putting some serious pressure on its finances. "To all councils [the freeze] is probably a big issue, a big burden. To us, it's just off the planet," Mayor Annie Revie said. The council has been in "a high-risk category financially" since 2018 and entered into the crisis with about $2 million in debt. The extra hit means the council may be forced to sacrifice some services. "It's something we're going to have to look at. We're going to have to involve our community in what sort of services can we afford," she said. This will be a question many councils across the state will now face and, depending on the council, the loss of services could range from a pause on council-supported events and grants to delays on infrastructure upgrades and slower reparation of things like roads and street lamps. On paper, councils are asset-rich — they own parks, roads and buildings — but few of them can be sold or, as Derwent Valley Mayor Ben Shaw put it, "you can't sell a footpath". Derwent Valley Council has about $800,000 in outstanding rates for this financial year and as part of the agreed-upon hardship package, they won't be chasing them. Cr Shaw said with the council's cash flow in "disarray" he was worried about paying staff leave entitlements. "We're around about the $1 million mark [in leave entitlements] on our books, which is a real concern. We need to have that cash available plus we need to have operation cash as well," he said. He does not know how they will keep the hardship package and implement a freeze on rates. "If it all comes in and all our rates come in, we'll be fine," he said. "It's the fact that there's no incentive for anybody for this next 12 months to pay their rates because we won't be chasing them and there's no interest accrual on them. "If everybody decides not to pay their rates, we will run out of cash."In contrast, the New South Wales State Government has moved to allow councils to increase rates to protect them from a downturn during the coronavirus crisis, a move applauded by the business community. The predominantly council-owned body TasWater has also had to freeze rates, meaning it has not paid the councils dividends for the past six months and is unlikely to pay any next financial year — money many of the smaller councils rely on. But it's not just regional councils that are struggling. Hobart City Council has estimated that by the end of the financial year it will be down $10 million in revenue and next financial year, the worst case scenario will see it down $22 million. "We have similar challenges that most capital cities have because we all have a greater percentage of the hotels, hospitality and retail ratepayers and they're the ones that are struggling and asking for assistance," said Lord Mayor Anna Reynolds. The council has borrowed $20 million for operational purposes, including paying their staff. "Not getting access to JobKeeper was a significant blow to us, but also to local governments right around the country," said Cr Reynolds. While it initially paid all staff, Hobart's council has been forced to stand some of them down and next year's budget is likely to be more about maintenance than new projects. "We just have to make sure that we've got enough money to maintain what we have; that means there'll be less money for either new initiatives, new infrastructure or potentially some of those special festivals and events that the City of Hobart has been able to support in the past," she said. Amalgamation talk returnsTasmanian Chamber of Commerce and Industry chief executive Michael Bailey said with councils' finances in trouble, it is time the State Government reconsidered its policy on council amalgamations. "We've reached the stage where there are several councils across Tasmania who are really going to struggle to make it work, even in the medium term," he said. "It seems that amalgamating is the only way that we're going to get sensible local government in these areas."The financial case, for at least some mergers, has already been made. Tasmania has 29 councils for a population of just over 520,000 — by comparison Brisbane has one council for a population of 2.5 million. Feasibility studies commissioned in 2015 by then-local government minister Peter Gutwein found merging the four Greater Hobart councils — Hobart, Kingborough, Glenorchy and Clarence — would save $19 million per year. The creation of a great south-eastern council — which would include Clarence, Tasman, Sorell and Glamorgan Spring Bay — would save $7.6 million per year. The Government has shown a reluctance to force amalgamations, but Mr Bailey said that reform is now urgent. "What we'll see here, if we're not careful, are councils not exactly amalgamating, but almost bankrupting," he said. "Rather than neighbouring councils standing around waiting for the keys to be handed to them, what I'd prefer to see is a more strategic approach.""It makes a lot more sense for there to be strategy leading into these sorts of things rather than a collapse of a council, which I think we could genuinely be seeing in a couple of council areas across the state."But Cr Revie said she was "adamantly" against it. "We're short of money, but I believe that council in a small place like this means much more than money."In a statement, Local Government Minister Mark Shelton said the Government's position has not changed and "significant local government reforms stand the best chance of succeeding when processes are voluntary". "Councils are well-equipped to make decisions regarding how they respond to and recover from the economic effects of the coronavirus pandemic and if councils determine this should include conversations on amalgamation, then the Government will work with them on their ideas," he said.
Had you suggested a month ago that there could be too much live sport this year, it would have been assumed your COVID-19 swab had penetrated the naval cavity and become lodged in your cerebral cortex. That was back when the forecasts of any sport being played before Christmas seemed bleak and some of us ridiculed Australian Rugby League Commission chairman Peter V'landys for his preposterous insistence his competition would start on May 28. Now, in just nine days, elated fans will howl at their televisions that "one ref is still one too many!" as Pugnacious Pete's NRL leads sport back onto the field — that is, if you don't count horse racing as a sport, which many don't until the spring or autumn carnivals when, suddenly, they do. Two weeks later, the AFL will return when most anticipate Victorian giants Richmond and Collingwood will be given the honour of playing the first match, something that would no doubt thrill already disgruntled fans from Western Australia and South Australia, whose teams will be hunkered down in Queensland hubs. Then the (not so) Super Rugby could be back in early July, the A-League season completed by August (and presumably started again in October), Super Netball might be rebooted and various international events, including the golf and tennis majors (except the Open Championship and Wimbledon), could have confirmed their current tentative bookings. Most likely, there will be no crowds. But by August we will be as accustomed to watching matches played in eerily empty stadiums as we have become to having them drowned out by hysterical commentators. Which leads to the very welcome but unforeseen problem created by the requisite scheduling adjustments, a period that would challenge Roy Slaven and HG Nelson's oft-repeated rule of thumb: too much sport is barely enough. By extending the NRL and AFL seasons, we have notionally created an Octoberfest of sport where the footy finals will collide with the spring racing carnival and potentially the men's ICC T20 World Cup, as well as several other global events. The AFL grand final may share October 24 with the 100th running of the Cox Plate, while on November 11 the Nine Network is scheduled to broadcast rugby league's second State of Origin encounter and a T20 World Cup semi-final, potentially featuring Australia. The second clash of events appears the least likely, given the increasing murmurs the T20 World Cup will be postponed until February or — given there is another T20 World Cup in India late next year — abandoned, especially with the Indian Premier League's operators eyeing the October/November period covetously. The AFL won't be seen to publicly death-ride the big cricket circus, given it needs to negotiate with Cricket Australia over ground access for state and community cricket. But, privately, AFL officials are hoping the T20 World Cup is at least shifted because of the potential clashes over ground availability, most obviously the MCG on grand final day. Although, assuming crowds are still not permitted in late October, the AFL's showpiece might be better accommodated as a purely TV product at the Docklands stadium or even — shock, horror! — a non-Victorian ground, given the cavernous MCG was the least atmospheric venue during the crowd-less opening round. Racing among scheduling logjamHorse racing has notionally been the one remaining attraction for sports fans in lockdown. Even if, for some of us, watching Michael Jordan reminisce about great games and even greater grudges has been a more entertaining distraction than a midweek maiden from Hawkesbury. But having been the only show in town during what is normally its downtime, horse racing will have the NRL and AFL for company during its spring carnival unless it adopts the most imaginative course and avoids the clash by moving to November. The Melbourne Cup winner is on the fence, as two horses outside it bump each other near the finish. There are no plans to move the Melbourne Cup away from the first Tuesday in November.(AAP: Michael Dodge)The suggestion the Melbourne Cup could be run on anything other than the first Tuesday in November was immediately shot down by Victoria Racing Club chief executive Neil Wilson. "Cup week is Cup week," said Wilson, adopting the kind of literalist approach to scheduling that seems to assume COVID-19 has hitherto undiagnosed respect for racing tradition. Meanwhile, the Melbourne Racing Club and Moonee Valley Racing Club are at least considering the idea of shifting the Caulfield Cup and Cox Plate respectively to November to avoid Saturday clashes with football finals. This could raise the novel problem for punters of lining up how Melbourne Cup form translates to the Caulfield Cup and the Cox Plate rather than the other way around, albeit without the annual mystery of rating international horses with exotic form over seemingly random distances. This also raises the question of why three separate clubs are required to run Melbourne racing, although it would take more than a global pandemic to modernise Australian racing's arcane governance model. At the local level, the idea of any sport being contested remains problematic, with some confusion about the application of the Australian Institute of Sport's three-staged Framework for Rebooting Sport. As the weeks tick by, various local football codes continue to weigh up the cost-effectiveness of returning to the park, while coaches of junior teams are increasingly eager to get kids kicking a ball. But while we are waiting to play sport, the scheduling jam confronting various administrations could create a wonderfully unexpected problem for viewers. A period starting in usually barren October when, as Roy and HG might say: too much sport will be bloody great!
Chinese President Xi Jinping has defended China's handling of the coronavirus outbreak, saying his country will support a "comprehensive" World Health Organization-led review into the global response after the virus is brought under control. Key points:Chinese President Xi Jinping says his country has acted with "openness and transparency" throughout the coronavirus outbreakMr Xi said China would support a WHO-led investigation into the pandemicAustralia is expected to back a draft resolution from the EU calling for an independent inquiryMr Xi told the World Health Assembly in Geneva that China had been open and transparent about the coronavirus outbreak, which started in Hubei province in late 2019, and said his country would support an investigation "conducted in an objective and impartial way". "This work needs a scientific and professional attitude, and needs to be led by the WHO," Mr Xi told the assembly via a video message. "And the principles of objectivity and fairness need to be upheld."His comments came as the US blasted the WHO's response to the pandemic and took a thinly-veiled swipe at China for an "apparent attempt to conceal" the initial outbreak, and WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus signalled an independent review would begin as soon as possible. China will also provide $US2 billion ($3.1b) over two years towards helping with the COVID-19 response, and Mr Xi promised any vaccine developed by his country would be made a global public good. Mr Xi did not indicate whether China would vote for a joint resolution by Australia and other countries calling for an independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus pandemic. He described the pandemic as the "most serious global public health emergency" since World War II and defended his country's handling of the crisis, which has come under fierce criticism from the United States and President Donald Trump. "All along we have acted with openness and transparency and responsibility," Mr Xi said. "We have turned the tide on the virus". The World Health Assembly is the annual meeting in Geneva of all 194 members of the World Health Organization, but due to coronavirus this year's assembly is being held online. US blasts WHO response, takes swipe at ChinaLast month, Mr Trump accused the WHO of being a "pipe organ for China" and on Monday his health secretary continued the attack. Without mentioning China by name, Health Secretary Alex Azar made it clear Washington considered the WHO jointly responsible. "We must be frank about one of the primary reasons this outbreak spun out of control," Mr Azar said. "There was a failure by this organisation to obtain the information that the world needed, and that failure cost many lives.""We saw that WHO failed at its core mission of information sharing and transparency when member states do not act in good faith. "This cannot ever happen again."Dr Tedros, who defended the organisation's alerts, said "WHO sounded the alarm early, and we sounded it often". When the WHO declared a global emergency on January 30, he said, there were fewer than 100 cases outside China, and no deaths. Push for independent coronavirus inquiryAustralia is one of almost 120 WHO member nations backing a European Union draft motion calling for "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of the "international health response to COVID-19". Australian Health Minister Greg Hunt delivered an address on Monday backing the EU resolution and outlined Australia's response to the crisis. "We are pleased to have support for an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation of the global response," Mr Hunt said. "We need to learn the lessons from this pandemic and ensure we have the strongest possible global health architecture, with an enhanced ability to prevent and respond to future outbreaks."Australia was the first nation after the US to call for an independent probe, including into the initial handling of the outbreak in Hubei, drawing angry protests from China. But since then, it has toned down some of its demands, while working to both toughen up — and gather support for — the EU motion. Dr Tedros, who has always promised a review, told the forum it would come "at the earliest appropriate moment" and make recommendations for the future. He received robust backing from the WHO's independent oversight panel. "Every country and every organisation must examine its response and learn from its experience," he said, adding that the review must cover "all actors in good faith". The EU resolution is expected to be debated and adopted on Tuesday.
National Cabinet's key health advisory committee has confirmed it never recommended internal border closures, as states and territories come under pressure to lift their restrictions and once again allow travel within Australia. Key points:National Cabinet's key health committee has never recommended state borders close to contain coronavirusA former Health Department boss says economies can't function properly while borders remain closedThe Queensland Premier is warning her state's border might be closed until SeptemberQueensland, Western Australia, South Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory all closed their borders at the height of the coronavirus crisis, either banning non-residents from entering or requiring travellers to self-quarantine for a fortnight. But as the nation begins its three-stage process of easing COVID-19 restrictions, the state of the borders remains one of the most contentious issues. Prime Minister Scott Morrison has previously said he hoped Australians could travel interstate in time for the July school holidays, but New South Wales Premier Gladys Berejiklian is urging her counterparts to "get those borders open as soon as possible". Federal Deputy Chief Medical Officer Paul Kelly said the decision to close state borders was not based on any health advice given to the National Cabinet and suggested that as the number of cases continues to fall, leaders might reconsider the measure. "At the national level, we've never suggested that internal borders within Australia should be closed," he said. "But, if you look at when those decisions were made some weeks ago, we had a rapidly increasing number of cases each day right around Australia but particularly in the south-eastern corner of the nation. "And so, when you look at what's happening now with just very few cases, only just over 100 cases in the last week and only 11 in the last 24 hours, I think that things have changed a lot."When asked about those comments on Monday, Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk stood firm, suggesting there might be no change before September, four months away. "There is still community transmission in Victoria and in New South Wales," she told ABC News Breakfast. "So as soon as my Chief Health Officer says that I can relax those restrictions, we absolutely will."Ms Palaszczuk suggested a "travel bubble" might be possible between the states that had closed their borders before they are opened to New South Wales and Victoria. However Federal Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham suggested such action could be costly and states that remain shut will need to compensate tourism businesses. "If the successful suppression of COVID-19 continues then the states should be relaxing their border controls," Senator Birmingham said. "If one or two states were to hold out then they will be answerable to their tourism industry and will ultimately need to provide additional support to that industry."Former Health Department secretary Jane Halton also questioned the need to keep internal borders closed, saying Australia's economy "doesn't work in hermetically sealed spheres". A member of the Federal Government's COVID-19 Co-ordination Commission, Ms Halton said she did not believe it was an effective way of controlling the spread of the virus. "I'm personally not convinced that our internal borders are the right way to manage our risks," she told the National Press Club. "I understand why people are nervous, but I would encourage people to think about how we maintain control, perhaps while enabling business to operate."In Western Australia, which has long joked about seceding from the rest of the nation, there is strong public support for the state's hard border, meaning it will likely be among the last restrictions eased in that state. As of Monday, WA had recorded 554 coronavirus cases, compared to 1,055 in Queensland, 1,558 in Victoria and 3,075 in New South Wales. In another sign of the country's progress in suppressing COVID-19, the National Cabinet is not due to meet for another week while the daily briefing given by the Chief Medical Officer or deputy chief medical officers is being reduced to three times a week.
If you got the feeling cash was slowly disappearing from our daily transactions even before coronavirus hit, you were right. Key points:Cash is sometimes required in cases of financial abuse, one of the most common forms of domestic violence, with perpetrators controlling family financesThe homeless are also disadvantaged by a cashless society with people having issues with connectivityRecent research revealed 92 per cent of seniors use the internet, with 57 per cent using it for bankingAccording to the Reserve Bank's 2019 Consumer Payments Survey, Australians are increasingly preferring to use electronic payment methods — with just 27 per cent of all consumer payments made with cash, compared with 37 per cent in 2016, and 69 per cent in 2007. Within a matter of days of COVID-19 cases being diagnosed in Australia, cash suddenly became unacceptable currency in the few businesses that remained open under the newly instituted, socially isolating restrictions. So what has the decline of cash meant for people who rely on physical dollars and cents — everyone from parents handing over pocket money to more vulnerable members of the community such as seniors, the homeless, and people fleeing domestic violence?How Australians pay for goods and services: consumer survey resultsCash needed for survivalIn many cases, cash is a necessary means of survival, especially for victims of domestic violence. Financial abuse is one of the most common forms of domestic violence. Perpetrators controlling the family finances can make it difficult for victims to leave and seek refuge by limiting access to accounts, credit and debit cards, or only providing a weekly cash amount for shopping and expenses. "Most of the women that we work with would approach us and say they actually have very few resources, and that he controls everything. Property and other assets might be in his name or controlled by him," said the CEO of Bendigo's Centre for Non-Violence, Margaret Augerinos. "They may not have access to credit cards or any other banking opportunities, so that is a very common story."However, Ms Augerinos said essential crisis payments and financial support for victims of domestic violence arrive through electronic transactions. Setting up new accounts and financial planning is something domestic service support services help provide. Difficulty accessing the digital worldThe other group of vulnerable people disadvantaged by a cashless society are the homeless. Some partake in street begging to top up government support payments which are received digitally through online accounts. While many are quite "tech savvy" in terms of being able to access different technologies as payment, according to the chief operating officer for homeless and low-income support service Haven Home Safe, Trudi Ray, accessibility to the digital world can be problematic. "What we will be seeing is people having issues with connectivity, with being able to access the internet — and therefore their funds — which is certainly a concern," she said. With many of the local organisations that support people with digital access closed at the moment, there will be an impact. "We've been making sure that we are aware of where the free wi-fi hot spots are around the different municipalities, and we're able to send people to those locations if they do run out of data," Ms Ray said. "We've also talked to Telstra about some other options available to our clients, and we do offer cards that have credit to ensure their technology needs are supported."Second wave of seniors going onlineThere has been a significant uptake of technology by older Australians, which means switching from cash to cards and online banking during the pandemic has made less of an impact. Recent research from RMIT University revealed 92 per cent of seniors use the internet, with 77 per cent using it to find information and 57 per cent using it for banking. Life under a pandemic has meant use of the internet amongst seniors has increased to include social media and applications such as Zoom, Microsoft Teams, and Skype. Where once those platforms and applications were previously perceived as barriers, this is no longer the case. "[Previously seniors said] 'I'm not comfortable, I don't have the skills, I don't know how to do this'. But now that it is a necessity to stay in touch, we see that they have been able to overcome these barriers," said Dr Torgeir Aleti from RMIT University's School of Economics, Finance and Marketing. He believes we are seeing a second wave of seniors online and participating in a whole range of activities. 'Tricky time for the tooth fairy'At the other end of the age scale, earning pocket money from chores around the home and the loss of a tooth or two is a rite of passage for most children. But spending their small fortunes has gotten a little harder today. "With many families spending more time at home, parents might be using pocket money to motivate children to take on jobs around the house," said Professor Julie Green, executive director at online parenting organisation Raising Children. "In the current situation with many shops preferring cashless transactions, parents could think about substituting pocket money using coins and notes for other items such as tokens, or perhaps notes with the value of the pocket money written on them," she said. "These could then be exchanged when children have reached a saving goal or would like to spend their money. "It's a tricky time for the tooth fairy with coins not being widely accepted at the moment."Professor Green suggested parents could consider providing a little gift instead of cash when a child loses a tooth.
With all six family members of Amy Pytchin's family working and learning from her Dubbo home due to coronavirus restrictions, electricity consumption has gone through the roof. Key points:One electricity retailer says consumption is up by 40 per cent this monthMany retailers have stopped reading meters in personWith family members working from home and homeschooling, bills have soared"We're definitely expecting our next bill to be higher than usual," Ms Pychtin said. "We're running multiple computers, devices and chargers all at once. "We're trying to switch off lights and open blinds, and put on jumpers instead of heaters."Put a jumper on, nowEnergy retail boss Domenic Capomolla said the Pychtins were not alone. He estimated households were consuming 40 per cent more electricity each day than was typical for this time of year. "This May has had a colder start and there have been a lot of people at home that wouldn't normally be using heating and appliances all day long," Mr Capomolla, chief executive of Tango Energy, said. Mr Capomolla said households needed to curb usage now to avoid bill shock. "The spike in usage incredible even when you account for seasonality."Discounts helpPreparing for quarterly power bills is crucial for Steven Cassell, from Molong. The disability pensioner and his wife spend much of their time at home. Each fortnight Mr Cassell pays $150 to his electricity retailer so his account is always in credit. When his bill arrives, he pays the outstanding amount immediately and is rewarded with a 30 per cent discount. "We can't let our bills get out of control and this works really well for us."Beware of estimatesDue to social distancing requirements, many electricity retailers have stopped reading meters in person, instead, opting to estimate customers' usage based on past consumption patterns. Tambar Springs farmers Grahame and Noni Pryor urged others not to "blindly" pay bills based on estimates. "Estimates can result in stupidly high consumption figures — in our experience — 20 to 30 per cent over what you've actually used," Mrs Pryor said. Mrs Pryor said consumers should photograph their own metres where it's not possible for the retailer to do so. "It's frustrating having to phone the retailers and correct the bill but you shouldn't let anyone charge you for a good or service that you simply didn't receive," she said.
A Melbourne aged care home is in lockdown and all workers and staff will be tested for coronavirus after a resident there became a suspected coronavirus case over the weekend. Key points:Health authorities initially said the resident at the Villa Maria aged care home in Bundoora was one of Monday's new coronavirus casesThey later said the resident had returned an "inconclusive" result, but that the result was treated as positive as a precautionAll staff and residents at the home will be tested for coronavirus over the next few daysVictorian health authorities said on Monday afternoon a resident at the Villa Maria aged care facility in Bundoora was among eight new Victorian coronavirus cases. But the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) later clarified that the resident had returned an "inconclusive" test, which was being treated as positive under the health unit's policy. "This is a precautionary approach designed to minimise potential spread as quickly as possible," the statement said. "Because of the high-risk setting, the aged care facility will continue to be managed as if it were an outbreak site for at least two weeks."The ABC has asked the DHHS whether cases where people return "inconclusive" results are routinely added to the tally of coronavirus cases in Victoria. The home's operator, Villa Maria Catholic Homes (VMCH), said the entire home was in lockdown as a result and the resident, who had no symptoms, was quarantined in their room. Over the weekend, the resident was taken to hospital with a temperature of 39 degrees Celsius before returning the inconclusive test, which had since been followed by a negative test, VMCH said in a statement. "Staff who have had close contact with the person are in self-isolation at home. All other staff are being tested for COVID-19," the statement said. "Should any signs of ill health appear, we will seek medical attention immediately."It comes as a dozen McDonald's restaurants across Melbourne's north and west have been closed and hundreds of workers asked to self-isolate after a delivery driver tested positive for coronavirus. Health authorities believe the driver was a close contact of an employee at the Craigieburn McDonald's who tested positive last week. The fast-food chain says the restaurants were closed out of an "abundance of caution" and that no further employees have tested positive. Victoria announced eight new cases of coronavirus on Monday, including two close contacts of cases in a cluster linked to the Fawkner McDonald's, and three cases in hotel quarantine. The Fawkner McDonald's outlet has now been linked to 12 cases. McDonald's Australia chief executive Andrew Gregory told ABC Radio Melbourne the driver's positive test was confirmed "as late as yesterday [Sunday] afternoon" and the 12 restaurants were closed within hours of the company being told. Latest information from the Victorian Government"It’s going to impact about 1,000 staff," he said. Most of these workers are expected to return to work as the restaurants reopen in coming days with about 200, who were working during the deliveries or afterwards, asked to stay at home for two weeks. The outlet at Craigieburn was closed on Friday for cleaning after an employee — a relative of one of the cases linked to the Fawkner outlet — tested positive. A McDonald's spokesperson confirmed the restaurant closures on Monday morning. "McDonald's Australia confirms no other employees have tested positive for COVID-19 at this time," the spokesperson said in a statement. "However, out of an abundance of caution, we have made the decision to close and conduct a deep clean of 12 restaurants in Victoria, following confirmation a truck driver for an external service provider has tested positive for COVID-19. "The truck driver made deliveries to 12 restaurants and interacted with a small number of restaurant employees on each occasion while asymptomatic and unaware they had contracted COVID-19."Potential close contacts and employees who worked shifts during and after the driver's deliveries had been told not to return to work for 14 days and to get tested, the spokesperson said. "The Department of Health has identified the truck driver as a workplace close contact of the previously announced Craigieburn COVID-19 case."The spokesperson said McDonald's would reopen each of the restaurants after the deep cleans were completed and when replacement workers were available. The closed restaurants are:Melton EastLaverton NorthYallambieTaylors LakesCampbellfieldSunburyHoppers CrossingRiverdale VillageSandownCalder Highway Northbound/OutboundCalder Highway Southbound/InboundBP Rockbank Service Centre OutboundPremier says outbreak a 'really big concern'Premier Daniel Andrews told Channel Nine this morning any outbreak, particularly one involving a case with no symptoms, was "obviously a really big concern". He said the McDonald's cluster highlighted how rapidly the virus spread and why testing was so important. "We're going to see more of these outbreaks," Mr Andrews said. "The Prime Minister has made that clear. "I've made the point that it's going to be part of this virus as it presents in the weeks and months to come and that's why we've all boosted our teams right across the country to be able to track, trace and respond really quickly to outbreaks."The Premier added that the state's public health team were "very confident" about Monday's reopening of Cedar Meats' Brooklyn abattoir, which has been linked to 100 cases. "I think there's about 20 staff going back in there," he said. "They're working in one particular part of that business in the cold storage part of that business. "That's a significant outbreak but one that the Chief Medical Officer, Brendan Murphy, has made clear has been handled very well by the public health team."Single case closes two Melbourne businessesMeanwhile, a Domino's restaurant in Fairfield and a mattress and foam manufacturer in Deer Park were closed on Friday after man who worked at both businesses tested positive to coronavirus. A spokesperson for the pizza chain said in a statement the employee last worked at the Fairfield restaurant on May 8 and was asymptomatic at the time. The store was undergoing a "full environmental clean" and would be reopened on May 23, the statement said. "Upon being notified of the positive test result, Domino’s immediately closed this store, notified all Fairfield store team members and their families, and recommended everyone self-isolate and seek testing," it said. Comfort Group chief executive Peter Mullin said the same man worked at the company's Deer Park manufacturing facility. Mr Mullin said the employee began suffering cold-like symptoms and got tested the weekend of May 9 and 10 and had not been to work since. The factory was shut on Friday after the test results came back on Thursday night. Mr Mullin said the facility was being deep-cleaned over the weekend and would remain closed until Wednesday. About 200 people who had been at the factory since April 10 were being tested, he added. "We've been implementing stringent practices and distancing protocols including segregated meal break breaks and separating workers," he said. The company had identified only three people who would be classified as "close contacts" of the infected employee and two of them had already tested negative, he added.
As a national parks advocate, Nick Sawyer has been more frustrated than most by the coronavirus-crisis park closures, but he's seeing them as a chance rethink tourism. Key points:There are calls for a more sustainable use of reopening National Parks with less overcrowding rather than new infrastructureSustainability is seen as an important factor, with an industry less reliance on cruise ships and planesFamily and friends visiting each other will be the first wave of tourism recovery as the mode, price and destination of travel changesMr Sawyer, president of Tasmania's National Parks Association, has witnessed the boom in the state's industry in recent years, as its natural wonders like Cradle Mountain and Wineglass Bay draw tourists from the mainland and around the globe. He thinks the pandemic shutdown of Australia's parks and the devastation of the tourism industry should be seized as an opportunity to look outside the box as we rebuild. "This is a heaven-sent opportunity to rethink the whole approach," he said. For Mr Sawyer, better ways of managing the return of tourists and eventually their booming numbers won't necessarily mean more infrastructure, like dedicated walkways, viewing platforms and handrails. "For example, the very popular Wineglass Bay lookout [in Tasmania] is becoming too crowded, so the response [has been to consider building] a second lookout nearby," he said. "You don't need a second lookout. "You could try and space the tourists more evenly over the course of the day, thereby avoiding the worst of the crowding and giving them a much better experience."He points to shuttle bus systems as an example of a way visitor numbers could be managed at Wineglass Bay, to "avoid having to expand the car park, yet again". Mr Sawyer is among a growing number of voices suggesting the reopening of national parks across Australia presents an opportunity for a reset in the way Australia's natural wonders are managed. Tourism Australia managing director Phillipa Harrison said the reopening of parks would ignite people's interest in new ways of travelling. "There has been a rising interest in sustainability, and making sure you leave a light footprint when you travel," she said. "We think this is going to accelerate people's desire to travel more sustainably."University of Queensland Associate Professor Judith Mair said the pandemic had highlighted a myriad of ways Australia's tourism industry could be more sustainable, and not just when it came to tackling overcrowding. "It might be putting too much reliance on one sole market, it might be relying too much on cruise tourists, it might be involving the local community in decision-making," she said. "There are a lot of ways in which tourism could come back better than it was before."Tasmanian wildlife park operator Gena Cantwell said a financially sustainable attraction was now front-of-mind. Her park relied on the 40 cruise ships that were visiting Tasmania's north-west each year before an outbreak of coronavirus at the North West Regional Hospital in Burnie forced the strictest lock-down measures in the country. Ms Cantwell said she was forced to stand down some staff, and look for ways to retain keepers and feed animals. "It was horrible. It was probably one of the hardest days that we had to deal with here," she said. "It will always be in the back of our minds about how something like this can affect us so broadly. "It was surprising how quickly a virus can bring everything unstuck."After lockdown ends she said she would look to the local market, and locals' relatives, to help reopen the operation, but could not envision staff numbers increasing for some time. "I don't imagine that the international tourists or even the mainland tourists are going to come in any hurry," she said. "They're going to be a little bit scared, so we're just going to have to look and focus on what we can do for our local market and our staff. "I think our tourism bodies are going to have to do a fair bit of damage control."Tourism Australia said it was on the case, but the price, destination and mode of tourism travel would change. "We really are looking to our domestic market to get our industry back on their feet again," Ms Harrison said. "We probably will see for a little while people wanting to control their own environment a little more, so we do expect to see people staying a little closer to home and taking their own transport."That might mean people using hire cars over planes and buses, or choosing short-stay accommodation over hotels and buffet breakfasts. "This is a new normal for tourist operators," she said. "They are going to have to work out how they can run their businesses economically and work out how they make money with the new regulations around social distancing."sMoney on the minds of tourists and operatorsAssociation Professor Mair believes people will have less money to spend, and that will be reflected in what's on offer. "People tend to think of tourism as a recovery vehicle for a destination, so it's about getting people back in and spending their money in a destination as soon as possible," she said. "Initially that will be very localised, so you might be travelling from Brisbane to the Gold Coast, or Melbourne to Mornington. "They'll have to be value-added experiences offered, so perhaps hotels or accommodation might do three nights for the price of two."Nick Sawyer suggested any government's stimulus funding for the tourism industry should aim to draw people to lesser-known national parks, rather than well-known attractions. "There's a huge maintenance backlog of existing facilities," he said. "In a lot of our parks, the facilities in the remote areas are getting terribly run down."The lesser-known attractions will also be the focus of Tourism Australia's campaigns. "I think people think they know what there is to see and do in Australia," Ms Harrison said. "But there has been so much development in the last decade particularly."The industry group is going to encourage Australians to reignite their love for the road trip, and visit friends and family in initial stages, before widening their scope. "We are going to be promoting some really great road trips you can do either intrastate or interstate, and also some great epic national road trips."
Queensland Health says there will be an independent investigation into how a nurse with coronavirus continued to work at a Rockhampton aged care home, while showing symptoms. Key points:More than 600 people were tested for COVID-19 at fever clinics in Rockhampton at the weekendA separate 200 staff and residents of an aged care home have tested negative to the virus, after a nurse who worked there tested positive. More than 40 nurses are in isolation and 20 have been deployed from southern parts of the state to assistHealth Minister Steven Miles said he has asked the department's director-general to commission the investigation. "We want to understand exactly how it happened, what went wrong, why it went wrong and how we can make sure it never happens again," he said. "Not just at the 16 aged care facilities run at HHS but also at our Queensland Health sites. "We need to ensure all of our patients and residents in our care are kept safe."The Central Queensland Hospital and Health Service has also launched an investigation. More than 40 nurses are in self-isolation and hundreds of people are awaiting coronavirus test results after the nurse tested positive to COVID-19 last week and the aged care facility went into lockdown. The nurses — who worked in the same unit as the nurse who tested positive — have all tested negative but will be in isolation for two weeks in case they show symptoms and have to be retested. Mr Miles said 35 residents were moved from the aged care centre to other facilities across Rockhampton over the weekend to enable residents to have private rooms. "That has allowed residents to be moved around in the facility and have private rooms where they can be isolated with their own bathrooms, and infection control can be implemented," he said. Mr Miles said 763 Rockhampton locals were tested over the weekend and of the returned results, none have been positive. Not clear how nurse contracted virusChief Health Officer Dr Jeannette Young said all staff and residents from the facility will be closely monitored for a two-week period. "All of the 114 residents who were in the facility at the time the enrolled nurse was working in the facility have been tested and all of them are negative," she said. "Plus all of the staff who have worked at the facility for the last month have now been tested — except for one who's been on leave — all of those staff have been tested and are negative."Dr Young said she hoped the two investigations would get to the bottom of why the nurse continued to work while displaying symptoms and after being tested. "I've been very disappointed that happened," she said. "Since she [the nurse] had the confirmed result she has been extremely cooperative and has worked very closely with us, and indeed agreed to a second test. "Prior to then we need to work out what exactly happened."Dr Young said Queensland Health was still trying to work out how the nurse contracted coronavirus. "At this stage we still don't know whether she contracted the infection on one of the two flights that she was on to go down to Brisbane and back to Rockhampton, or whether it was in Brisbane itself — we don't know," she said. "She is a community-acquired case, we know it's unlikely she acquired it here in Rockhampton because it's so long since you had a confirmed case, but of course that still is possible."Nurses sent from southern QueenslandMedical staff from southern Queensland, including about 20 nurses, have been flown in to assist in hospitals, fever clinics and aged care facilities as the number of people stepping forward for testing increases. The crisis was sparked after an enrolled nurse, who is understood to have worked in reception at the state-run North Rockhampton Nursing Centre, tested positive to coronavirus last Thursday. The nurse is believed to have been contagious since May 3 and continued working while showing symptoms. She returned to her workplace after being sent for coronavirus testing, but before her results came back. Queensland Health is investigating the circumstances, including whether the nurse was checked for fever every day, as per requirements for all aged care facilities. A spokesperson for Queensland Health said all contacts were being closely monitored and secondary testing would be conducted if any of these individuals showed symptoms. Nurses in self-isolationCentral Queensland Hospital and Health Service said more than 600 people have been tested for the coronavirus at fever clinics in Rockhampton since Friday, and that more 5,000 calls had been made to the coronavirus hotline. Grant Burton from the Queensland Nurses and Midwifery Union said more than 40 nurses in the Rockhampton region had gone into isolation until they received their test results. "The fact that 41 or 42 staff have now been [self-isolated] at home has certainly been a challenge," he said. "Health services have risen to that and have staff flying in to assist."Mr Burton said union representatives were working with Queensland Health to ensure additional staff would be sent to Rockhampton if required in the coming days. "Staff are coming from Metro North and South with further discussions with Wide Bay and Darling Downs," he said. "They will be where they're needed — whether that's the fever clinic, the general hospital or the aged care centre."There are now two fever clinics in Rockhampton, with others at Yeppoon and Gladstone. Mr Burton said with increased demand for nursing and health services, it was important for those on the front line to remember their own health. "They certainly go above and beyond, and they feel the need to come to work, but the message is clear — if you are sick, stay home," he said. "There is additional staff coming in and we will be working in collaboration with the service to identify any areas that are running short."'Eerily like Newmarch House'Aged and Disability Advocacy Australia (ADA) is a Commonwealth-funded group which provides support to older people using aged care, and their families and carers. After hearing from families at Sydney's Newmarch House, CEO Geoff Rowe said he was "disturbed" to learn about the news in Rockhampton on Friday. "It is eerily like what has happened at Newmarch House," he said. "The infection was brought into an aged care facility in Sydney by a staff person who was unwell. "What we're seeing coming out of the North Rockhampton Nursing Centre is very encouraging, we're seeing a very proactive response. What we saw at Newmarch was a very slow response."Mr Rowe said it could be a stressful and traumatic time for central Queensland families. "It's not unusual, based on our experience with Newmarch in Sydney, for family members to be feeling left out of the loop and to learn what is happening on the news, which is very distressing," he said. "A lot of family members concerns were similar or the same, it was often around the lack of communication, the lack of any knowledge of what was happening with the family member. "I think what we're seeing at the moment at the [North Rockhampton Nursing] Centre is quite a calculated and a careful response and unfortunately families need to be patient."He said the advocacy group was open to providing weekly video link updates, similar to what has been done for Newmarch House families, to improve communication if families reach out. Residents and families can contact ADA on their 1800 700 600 hotline between 6:00am and 10:00pm everyday for support.
The coronavirus pandemic ravaging the planet has laid bare the unequal toll the virus is having on many segments of society, namely minorities and the disadvantaged. There are fewer places this is more profound than the United States. In a country that was unequal prior to the outbreak, the pandemic has exacerbated its racial inequalities, revealed its wealth disparities and exposed gaping holes in its social safety net. Putting the health crisis aside, the economic collapse triggered by the shutdown has been nothing short of staggering. It too has revealed another disparity. More than 33 million Americans have lost their jobs, and for the first time in decades, the face of this financial catastrophe is a predominately female one. If you break down the numbers even further, it's affecting women of colour the most. But this phenomenon isn't limited to the world's largest economy. Global blanket shutdowns and social distancing measures are shattering female-dominated industries like retail, hospitality, education and healthcare. Female unemployment rate hits 15 per cent"It is a she-cession," said Institute for Women's Policy Research president, C Nicole Mason. "What I mean by that is that women have been disproportionately impacted by the job losses over the past couple of months."More than half of the jobs lost in the US during April were held by women. Since February, female unemployment has jumped five-fold to 15 per cent. By comparison, the jobless rate for men was 13 per cent. It's a stark contrast to the global financial crisis, in which men largely shouldered the losses in the financial and construction sectors. Tina Edwards is among the millions at the forefront of this crisis. "I want to say we go back and reopen. But survive? I'm not sure," she said. The mother of six owns a day spa in Washington DC, and like so many other businesses, she was forced to close her doors. So far, her applications for small business and unemployment benefits have been rejected by America's social security system. "I personally don't believe we will reopen until July or August and even then, we won't be 50 per cent of the business we were."Her family used the Federal Government's one-off stimulus cheque to pay bills but with that now spent, she's eating into her emergency savings to make ends meet. "I don't know how, with one income, it's going to work," she said. "This is a really long emergency. With no extra income, we've never been down to just one income. "I know worst case, there are resources we can take advantage of. We haven't got there yet, but I wouldn't doubt I'd ask for assistance if I needed it."Women make up 70 per cent of global healthcare workforceThe April jobs numbers are a stunning and disappointing reversal from a major milestone in December, when women held more payroll jobs than men for the first time in about a decade. The losses are being felt across the globe including Australia. The official jobless figures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics show the number of jobs slumped by 8.1 per cent for women, compared to 6.2 per cent for men. Between mid-March and mid-April, 55 per cent of the jobs lost were held by women. There's no question working from home in a white-collar job is easier in this day and age of internet connectivity. More to the point, for those in roles that require close contact with people, there is no alternative. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has warned the pandemic throws up compounding burdens for women. Firstly, they make up 70 per cent of the global healthcare workforce, meaning they are more likely to be on the frontline treating people who are fighting the disease. They also make up the majority of employees in the parts of the economy that have been hardest hit by the lockdowns. Some women are taking on additional childcare burdensAmid it all, they continue to do most of the unpaid care work within the home, which has in some cases forced women to reduce their hours or leave their job to care for their children. This has been more pronounced in countries like the US, where schools and day care centres have been shuttered across the country for months, adding home-schooling to the list of chores. "They are struggling to put food on the table but they're also struggling to meet their primary care responsibilities," Ms Mason said. She said research by her institute showed 30 million women in the US with children under the age of 13 provided 40 per cent of their household income. "So, this pandemic will have a devastating impact on those families where women are the sole or primary breadwinner," she said. The big, unknown question is how long the shutdowns will last, which will determine how deep and painful the downturn will be. The road to recovery is still hard to visualiseThe unfolding crisis in countries hit hardest, like America, could hamper the road to recovery with many economists warning there won't be a one-for-one replacement in jobs lost. "Are those companies going to be able to rehire those people? That we just don't know," University of Michigan's Justin Wolfers said. "How many bankruptcies are we going to see? How much downsizing are we going to see?"If those temporary layoffs become permanent. That's when this moves from being a short, sharp shock to a long, deep ongoing recession," he said. In past economic crises, countries have wrestled their way out with government-backed nation building infrastructure projects. But if the danger of catching the virus continues to linger or a second wave hits, that might not be enough to drag the world out of this slumber.
A Melbourne couple has been left $20,000 out of pocket after their South African odyssey was cancelled because of coronavirus restrictions. Key points:Thousands of traveller are complaining about being refused refunds in social media support groupsOne industry expert says the refund process is complex, with multiple providers often involvedThe ACCC says consumer guarantees are unlikely to apply where travel is shut down by governmentBrigid and Don Burnard booked a $33,798 package holiday with Imagine Cruising which included a luxury cruise, rail adventure and safari. The company agreed to refund a third of the payment, but $20,246 remains outstanding, offered as a travel credit for the same itinerary in the future. Ms Burnard said due to her husband's ill health, and the fact it could be years before they can safely travel again due to coronavirus, a credit was "out of the question". "He turns 89 in August. It is impossible to even fathom him planning to go on any long trip," she said. The Burnards are not alone in their frustration, with thousands of consumers joining social media support groups after having their request for refunds refused. Facebook groups like Flight Centre Class Action Australia, Luxury Escaped Us and MSC Cancelled Cruise Group for Australians reveal the frustration of customers left out of pocket. Managing director of the Council of Australian Tour Operators Brett Jardine said travel companies were doing it tough and it would be a "far better outcome for all concerned" if customers agreed to postpone their trip, instead of cancelling. Mr Jardine said the refund process was not always straightforward, due to the complex nature of travel-provider networks. "Within that supply chain, there are travel agents, tour operators, wholesalers, destination management companies," Mr Jardine said. "The money can be caught up anywhere within that ecosystem, and there are binding agreements within each of those layers."An advertisement for a luxury African holiday torn out of a newspaper. An advertisement for the Imagine Cruising holiday that was meant to depart in March.(ABC News: Alison Xiao)The Australian Consumer Competition Commission (ACCC) said a consumer's right to a refund was governed by individual terms and conditions. "Where travel has been shut down by government action, the consumer guarantees are unlikely to apply," it said in a statement. Ms Burnard said chasing up the company had been stressful and confusing. "It seems to be that it's deliberately made difficult, so they don't have to give you answers," she said. "You think 'what can I do next?'. And there doesn't seem to be anywhere else to turn."Travellers who may be experiencing similar issues to the Burnards can find advice through Choice, the ACCC and state consumer protection bodies. Law firm Slater and Gordon are also investigating a class action against major travel providers. The Burnards said they would keep fighting, even though the process had been tiring and painful. "It's just been a drawn-out saga … it just gets us down," Ms Burnard said. Imagine Cruising has been contacted for comment. After this story was published, the company told the ABC the couple would get a full refund "in due course". The company said is was doing its "very best" to find favourable options for their customers, but that confirming refund details with suppliers was "proving to be challenging and time consuming".
Anyone under 30 would be guaranteed a job, a better income or a free place at a university or TAFE, under a new policy position the federal Greens have launched in response to the coronavirus pandemic. Key points:The Greens want the Government to take on billions of debt to rebuild the economyThe party is warning young people are at risk of facing long-term unemploymentThe Government has cautioned future generations would have to pay for its spendingThe crossbench party wants the Federal Government to take on tens of billions of dollars of debt in a bid to rebuild the Australian economy after COVID-19. Leader Adam Bandt accused the Coalition and Labor of having responded to the crisis with austerity measures, rather than billions in new spending to reshape Australia in a post-COVID environment. "Young people have been smashed by the corona crisis," he said. "If we don't offer every young person a job, a study place or a decent income, we risk creating a lost generation."The Federal Government has allocated more than $230 billion to coronavirus-stimulus measures, including a $130 billion six-month wage subsidy for six million workers. The Government has also doubled the JobSeeker payment, previously called Newstart. Labor has backed both measures but wants the JobKeeper program to be extended to include more casual workers, with leader Anthony Albanese urging the Government to channel Australia's former wartime prime ministers to reshape the Australian economy. He wants the Government to build high-speed rail, decentralise services and revitalise the nation's manufacturing sector. But the Greens want the Coalition to go even further. "If we don't, the cost will be very, very high," Mr Bandt told the ABC. "We learnt from the global financial crisis that for young people who are starting their working lives at a time of recession, they carry the scars with them for life unless they're given the opportunity of good, decent work with decent security working on meaningful projects. "We owe this to young people because otherwise we'll be stuck paying for income support for a very long time for what could be a lost generation."Dubbed Invest To Recover, the Greens' plan seeks to create almost 900,000 jobs building renewable energy infrastructure in the public and private sectors. It also seeks to spend $60 billion to revive domestic manufacturing and processing. The arts would receive billions, to support a sector that has missed out on the JobKeeper $1,500-a-fortnight payment. The Greens want a $2.3 billion entertainment and creative industries fund to put artists into every school and library in Australia. The fund would also pay for festivals, films and live performances. The Government has repeatedly said the doubling of the JobSeeker payment, to $1,100 a fortnight, was only a temporary measure. Mr Bandt said the Greens would use their Senate crossbench numbers to fight any effort to return the payment to $550 a fortnight. Labor has also indicated it would fight any effort to return JobSeeker to its previous rate. Mr Bandt said it was incumbent upon the Government to act as a "safety-net employer", in guaranteeing work to people until the private sector rehired the 1 million people who have lost their jobs due to coronavirus. The Greens' call for a debt-laden approach to Government spending is all but certain to be rejected by the Coalition. Conservative commentators and some within the Government's backbench are already pushing for the Coalition to use a pre-planned June review of JobKeeper to cut back the program. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg has given no indication that was likely, but has warned about the economic toll additional spending would have on future generations. "Australians know there is no money tree," he told the Parliament last week. "What we borrow today, we must repay in the future. "Temporary and targeted, the new spending measures were not designed to go forever but to build a bridge to the recovery phase."
A coalition of 62 countries has backed a joint Australian and European Union push for an independent inquiry into the coronavirus outbreak ahead of a crucial World Health Assembly (WHA) meeting on Monday in Geneva. Key points:European nations and Australia have been rallying support for a draft EU motionThe motion does not specifically mention China or the city of WuhanAt this stage neither China nor the US have backed the motionAustralia was the first nation to call for an independent inquiry into how the coronavirus started. That drew furious condemnation from Beijing, which accused Australia of launching a political attack on China. But international support for the idea has been steadily growing. The Morrison Government has now swung its diplomatic firepower behind the European Union, which has also been pressing for an investigation while taking a more conciliatory line with Beijing. European nations and Australia have been rallying support for a draft EU motion which calls for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of "the WHO-coordinated international health response to COVID-19". The motion does not specifically mention China or the city of Wuhan where the outbreak is believed to have begun. Coronavirus investigation call made Australia a targetAustralia experienced astonishing hostility from our Chinese trading partner after calling for an inquiry into the start of the outbreak — but we're not the only ones feeling their wrath, writes Andrew Probyn. Australian Government sources said the language was strong enough to ensure that a proper and thorough investigation took place, although they are still calling this a "first step" towards ensuring transparency. At this stage neither China nor the US have backed the motion. EU and Australian diplomats were still working on Sunday to convince both major powers to give their support. In a statement, Foreign Affairs Minister Marise Payne said: "There is positive support for an independent review into the pandemic to help the world learn the lessons necessary to protect global health. "Australia and a significant number of countries are co-sponsoring the EU-led resolution, which includes a call for an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation. "This is about collaborating to equip the international community to better prevent or counter the next pandemic and keep our citizens safe."The EU's spokeswoman for foreign affairs, Virginie Battu-Henriksson, said the organisation was focused on reaching a consensus for an inquiry. "Of course, we need to have the support of all the major players, and China is one of them," she told the ABC. Meanwhile, US diplomats have been pressing for tougher language that specifically calls for a probe into how the virus started in the Chinese city of Wuhan. US President Donald Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo have both furiously denounced China's initial response to the virus, accusing it of covering up the initial outbreak and allowing it to spread around the world. But Ms Battu-Henriksson said the EU was focused on "really getting together and finding a solution which is workable for all". "For us, it is not the moment for us to enter any kind of blame game as we've seen in narratives from one part or another of the world," she said.
Wollongong registered nurse Carmen Wood is among many across the nation who have volunteered to rapidly upskill as part of preparations and response to the coronavirus threat. Key points:Nurses from different departments in hospitals are volunteering to upskill to intensive care to help in the COVID-19 crisisSenior colleagues have praised the nurses for their response and speed at upskillingThe rapid upskill is providing hospitals with greater capacity for any potential second waveMs Wood worked in intensive care almost a decade ago and said when the call went out for more staff to return to ICU she wanted to help her colleagues. "Physical risks didn't actually cross my mind, I have been working as a nurse for 12 years and never in my career did I feel at risk," she said. But it took a week for her to weigh up the potential emotional impact. "Some of my deep concerns were what I was seeing overseas — images and stories of staff in Italy, the UK and Spain," she said. "I was also trying to prepare myself for the worst, that meant potentially having patients pass away in our unit without any of their family beside them."Rapid upskillMs Wood said she was impressed by the speedy creation of education resources and enjoyed working with a buddy for on-the-job training. "Getting my head around the electronic medical records system 'eRIC' has been one that has taken me a bit of time, and getting my head around the medications that we give in intensive care," she said. "You'll find that a lot of the medication in intensive care aren't given in any other ward in the hospital, so there is a lot more complexity there."Fast response praisedA surgeon, wearing scrubs, stands outside a regional hospital"They are putting themselves in uncomfortable situations, and to be honest what we are doing anyway is an uncomfortable situation around the pandemic, so they have said as if that isn't enough we are going to retrain as well," Dr Ashford said. "Suddenly they not only have to understand the complex machinery, but complex patients, and that is a pretty big challenge."The hospital's director of nursing and midwifery, Kathleen Thorpe, said she was incredibly proud of her team. "Not one minute has been wasted, everything is about preparedness and planning, and not just for next week, but for the many months ahead that this could take," Ms Thorpe said. "As for the bravery, I remember one of the first days telling staff we were changing the patient acuity they have and there were two new graduates who put up their hands and said 'This is what I have been waiting for'. It does give you goosebumps."Creating capacity for possible second waveWhile local staff had not faced the surge of COVID-19 cases as experienced in some countries, Dr Ashford knew there could still be a challenge ahead. "A lot of people who put their hand up originally thought they were putting their hand up to go into a storm, but it's ended up being a calm day, so that is making the decision more difficult for people who are thinking, why did I bother doing this?""But this gives us a capacity that would not be possible without them putting their hands up."With International Nurses Day last week, Ms Wood said she was incredibly proud of what she and her colleagues had achieved in such a short space of time. "Coming together and delivering the best care they can in a such a stressful time," she said.
Some people believe coronavirus has given the Gold Coast time to slow down and reconsider the pace of development, while others say more construction is needed to kickstart the local economy. Key points:The Gold Coast expected to grow by 350,000, bringing its population to about 1 million by 2041The construction sector has warned building approvals could drop by 45 per cent due to coronavirusA developer says the industry is key to economic revival but a community group has called for a rethinkThe comments come as the city's population growth faces hiccups and the construction industry warns of a massive downturn. The President of Community Alliance Association, John Hicks, has been a vocal opponent of what he says are "excessive relaxations" of the council's City Plan — a guideline for the scope and scale of developments. "It will be a useful breathing space to have that conversation with the wider community without hectic pressures from very fast-paced development," he said. "We should use that time wisely to have a good think about the sort of city we are building."But with the construction sector employing up to 10 per cent of the Gold Coast's workforce, one developer has called for "more of the same" to help the city's economic recovery. 'Couple of bridges' to crossMaster Builders Queensland has warned the number of building approvals in the region could drop by 45 per cent. Developer Greg Rix said maintaining the Gold Coast's strong population growth was vital but there were "a couple of bridges" to cross first, including restrictions on international travel. "We're getting between 12,000 to 15,000 new people moving to the Gold Coast per annum, quite a large number of those are overseas investors," he said. "Interstate people migrating to the Gold Coast, financially, do they still have the ability to move to an area like our own?"If you don't have buyers, it's no good building projects."Mr Rix said a number of projects had been put on hold as the industry came to terms with the economic fallout of coronavirus. "The uncertainty will be the migration of people continuing to come to the Gold Coast," he said. "We have relied on overseas markets, that is a given, whether that overseas market returns at the same level or how long it takes to return, will affect the rollout of development on the Gold Coast."'Balance is tipped in favour' of developersMr Hicks said it was "business as usual" at Gold Coast City Council, despite four new councillors being elected in March. "We think it's business that's leading us down to city development more akin to Gotham City by the sea than a world-class sub-tropical leafy city". "Things need to be improved," he said. Mr Hicks said height and density limits in the City Plan had been relaxed too often, resulting in "overscale buildings with a very poor resident experience in adjacent properties". "The balance is tipped in favour strongly of the developer and we acknowledge that balance needs to be returned to a better place where the interests of the community and the developer are better balanced."A spokesperson for the City of Gold Coast said "it would not be considered appropriate for Council to hold regular town hall meetings in relation to developments". "Public notification requirements are stipulated within the State’s Planning Act. Town Hall meetings would not be appropriate in the context of statutory timeframes that are also mandated by the Planning Act."Development a 'backbone' of the Gold Coast's economyMr Rix said development had been "one of the backbones of the Gold Coast economy" but there would be "repercussions on settlement into our community which of course affects development and construction". "You won't see overseas travel into Australia probably till next year so that means that even when we're fired up in the economy we won't have those overseas investments," he said. "There may well be projects that were earmarked for construction this year delayed."But he said "post the virus, you're going to need employment" and that development meant more "people spending money at shopping centres, at schools". "The positive side is that the Gold Coast is still the premiere place to live in Australia and I believe we will see development continue to go forward."Mr Hicks said he was yet to see any significant drop on development proposals but that projects which fall outside of the City Plan should be rejected. "We're yet see the cranes disappear from the horizon. "We know we have to grow, that's acknowledged, but we just have to do it well," he said.
Police in London have arrested 19 people for deliberately breaking social distancing guidelines to protest against the rules, as demonstrations against coronavirus lockdown measures swept across Europe. Key points:Protests against coronavirus measures were held in major cities such as London and BerlinIn Spain, protesters denounced the Government as communists seeking to ruin the countryProtesters in Poland carried signs reading "Work and bread" and "It will be normal again"The Metropolitan Police said a group in central London's Hyde Park had been protesting about the Government's response to the COVID-19 pandemic and had failed to comply with repeated requests to disperse. Police officers were seen taking away protesters, including the brother of Britain's former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, Piers Corbyn. The protests occurred on the first weekend since Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced a slight loosening of England's lockdown. Mr Johnson announced a limited easing of Britain's coronavirus lockdown, adopting a cautious approach to try to ensure there was no second peak of infections that could further hurt the economy and cost lives. The country has been in lockdown since March 23. An unidentified woman wearing a mask took part in the protest holding a sign that said "stop violating our human rights". "I'm protesting because they are violating our rights and I'm against mandatory vaccination. It should be a free choice and I will not be putting poison into my body," she said. A total of 34,466 people have died in the United Kingdom and 236,711 cases were registered. "It was disappointing that a relatively small group in Hyde Park came together to protest the regulations in clear breach of the guidance, putting themselves and others at risk of infection," Laurence Taylor, Deputy Assistant Commissioner at the Metropolitan Police, said in a statement. 'Covidiots' gather to protests restrictions in GermanyIn Germany, thousands of people across the country took to the streets on Saturday to protest against restrictions. Germany's death toll from the virus has been lower than most of its European neighbours and some lockdown measures have already been relaxed. However, protests against the measures Chancellor Angela Merkel insists are needed to slow down the coronavirus outbreak have become more vocal and demonstrators have filled the streets for the second weekend in a row. Derided on social media as "covidiots" who risk causing a second wave of infections that could lead to a tightening of restrictions, protesters staged demonstrations at several locations across the capital Berlin and the surrounding state of Brandenburg. In Munich, organisers asked authorities to give the green light for a rally of up to 10,000 people on the Thersienwiese, a large square in the city centre on which Munich normally stages its world famous Oktoberfest beer festival. But city officials pointed to the need to respect social distancing rules and allowed a demonstration of up to 1,000 people. The hard core of protesters is being led by several new groups. One group is Resistance 2020, led by a lawyer from eastern Leipzig and a doctor from south-western Germany who question official corona statistics and view the main political parties as constructs of an elitist rule. Another group called COMPACT describes itself as the "sharp sword against imperial propaganda". It declares on its website that it is helping the "information offensive" for the growing protest movement. German media have suggested Russia could be behind a misinformation campaign that is spurring on protesters. After winning global respect for keeping the death rate low in Germany, Ms Merkel last week bowed to pressure from some of Germany's powerful regional premiers and agreed to a gradual re-opening of schools, shops and restaurants and even football. However, Ms Merkel, a scientist, has repeatedly warned about a second wave of infections, and a brief uptick in the reproduction rate to above the critical threshold of 1 earlier this week caused fresh concern. The new coronavirus has so far infected more than 173,000 people in Germany and killed nearly 7,900. Most Germans approve Ms Merkel's crisis management, with polls showing support for her conservative CDU/CSU alliance surging to 40 per cent. Dozens arrested in PolandDozens of people, including a senator, were detained during a protest of business owners in the Polish capital against restrictions brought in to tackle the new coronavirus. Warsaw police used tear gas against protesters, intervening in the demonstration after the city's administrators claimed the gathering was illegal because it had not been previously approved. Jacek Bury, a senator for the opposition Civic Platform party, said he was hurt by police when trying to defend another protester. Police said in a statement that public gatherings were still banned under government restrictions. "Unfortunately we are dealing with cases of aggression towards police. Due to the attacks on civil servants, we used methods of direct confrontation such as physical force and [tear] gas," the Warsaw police said in a tweet. However, police denied using force against Mr Bury — something that he claimed was a lie. Poland imposed a strict lockdown in mid-March, and while the restrictions affecting the country's economy are being slowly loosened, many business people say there are still too many. Protesters carrying signs saying, "Work and bread" and "It will be normal again" gathered in Warsaw's Old Town, saying restrictions need to be lifted further in order for them to sustain their livelihoods. Hair salons and restaurants are expected to reopen with new safety measures in place on Monday. Poland, with 38 million people, has more than 18,000 confirmed infections of the new virus and more than 900 deaths. Spaniards call on government to resignProtests sprang up around Spain on Saturday, with demonstrators gathering to bang pots and pans and call for the government to resign. At the largest such demonstration, in Madrid's wealthy Salamanca neighbourhood, several hundred people gathered despite the efforts of police to enforce social-distancing. Carrying Spanish flags and crying "viva Espana!" some denounced the leftist Government as communists seeking to ruin the country. "I am against all the measures which this Government has used to manage the coronavirus," banker Jose Flores said. "They need to test everybody so healthy people can get back to work and we can restart the economy," said a man who gave his name only as Carlos. "The worst virus is going to be the virus of Pedro and Pablo, who are going to ruin 47 million Spaniards," he said, referring to Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez and Deputy Prime Minister Pablo Iglesias. Similar protests took place in Zaragoza and the southern city of Seville, until recently a Socialist party stronghold. "It doesn't matter what the demonstrations are about. The important thing is to maintain social distancing," Mr Sanchez said. Silent protest held in ItalyIn Italy, members of the Italian Hospitality Network held spontaneous protests in several cities amid concerns that restrictions would negatively affect their income. Hospitality workers in Rome protested in front of the Pantheon, wearing their uniforms with a mourning armband while they stood in silence for several minutes. Restaurant managers and owners are worried that the safety measures they will have to adopt will not allow them to work properly and could result in financial losses for the business, as well as the income of their employees.
Well before coronavirus sent Australia into lockdown, bowls was facing dark times. Key points:The CEO of Bowls Australia said many clubs have suffered significant financial lossInternational representative Kristina Krstic says now would be a great opportunity to bring young people to the sportThe sport has made a push to increase membership, which has dwindled in recent yearsA decline in membership and revenue across the board for a decade had resulted in dozens of clubs folding in Australia's largest citiesIn 2019, several clubs in Brisbane and Sydney were forced to close their doors, struggling to compete with not only other sports but pubs and restaurants as well. The nationwide shutdown has only added to the headache of many clubs across the country. With many clubs slowly opening up their rinks, the long road back to financial stability for most clubs really begins. "Bowls Australia have recently undertaken a national survey of clubs and from the results, many clubs have clearly suffered significant financial losses which will necessitate a long period of recovery for many," Bowls Australia CEO Neil Dalrymple said. "It will take some time for bowls in Australia to recover but we remain optimistic that the sport and the 1,832 clubs across Australia will play a major role in reconnecting Australians on the other side of this pandemic."Despite the optimism, bowls has struggled for many years. The closure of Waverton North Sydney, as well as Toowong in Brisbane, cast a dark shadow over the future of the sport. The added pressure of coronavirus has left the top brass of the sport under no illusions. "The disappearance of any bowls clubs would be detrimental to those communities not only from a physical health perspective, but just as importantly, from a mental health and social consecutiveness perspective," Mr Dalrymple told ABC News. "Bowls Australia and our State and Territory Associations will be doing everything within our power to avoid the closing of any Bowls Clubs as a result of this pandemic."Bowls in search of the fountain of youthBowls clubs have struggled greatly in recent years. An injection of youth and a great presence in the community have been touted as key objectives to help revive the sport and its clubs. "Bowls Australia certainly isn't advocating for dramatic or drastic changes," Mr Dalrymple said. "But it is a great opportunity for clubs to attract new and younger members to their boards and committees to provide new innovative ideas to help grow clubs. "Now is a great time for clubs to try and increase our market share over the more dominating junior sports including netball, basketball, tennis and soccer."Emphasising the lack of contact in lawn bowls could be a major boost for the sport, according to one of the country's finest bowlers. Kristina Krstic is one of the younger members of the Australian international side and wants her sport to take advantage of the coronavirus shutdown. The 26-year-old from Western Australia has represented her country since she was 21 and sees an opportunity for a swarm of younger players to take up the game. "Placing emphasis on bowls being a "non-contact" sport may attract many families who may be hesitant to go back to contact sports," she said. "Kids have been missing out on the sporting aspects of their lives for almost a couple of months now so they may be interested in trying bowls while they aren't able to return to their usual sports."Preparations already underway across the boardMeasures to prepare sport and bowls clubs for the future were being prepared before the global health crisis. Deals with pay-television provider Foxtel, as well as coverage on SBS and Chanel 7 affiliate 7plus, was a step in the right direction, according to Ms Krstic. "I would definitely like to see this kind of exposure through media channels grow," she said. "Bowls' publicity on these channels is extremely important in regards to putting the sport out there and encouraging young people to take the sport up."But it is the measures at the local level which Mr Dalrymple told ABC were hoped to build clubs in their own communities. A marketing campaign launched in 2019 aimed at people aged between 30-50 is one of the newest measures to encourage new players to try the sport. "The campaign is reaching out to those looking for a team sport that's not inherently physically demanding in comparison to sports such as football and netball," he said. "Our campaign (named Local Legends Wanted) will be aired nationally in the coming months to help relaunch and reinvigorate bowls in Australia."Passion for the support needs to shine throughMs Krstic said the road back for bowls was going to be tough. "It's obviously a very difficult time for bowls clubs at the moment due to the loss of wages in response to COVID-19," she said. But a passionate base of players at clubs across the country will allow the sport to grow once rinks open up, according to Ms Krstic. "There are many existing members itching to get back to playing bowls which will help our bowls clubs grow when restrictions are relaxed," she said. "This moment in time could be a good opportunity for bowls clubs to "restart" and "rejuvenate", potentially by introducing bowls being played all year round"
While Australia received its first major reprieve from COVID-19 restrictions this weekend, our lives are still a long way from what we once called normal. Key points:A Brisbane gym is enacting strict social distancing measuresMost pools are likely to remain closed as it's too costly to reopenCity eateries are reconfiguring their dining spaces to low patronageIndividuals and businesses have been forced to adapt, painting a stark picture of what life might be like in the post-pandemic world. If you are someone who sets your alarm early to exercise — even when gyms can open their doors — don't expect your workout experience to be the same as it was prior to COVID-19. Outdoor bootcamps are allowing personal trainers to keep their businesses alive for now, but gym owners are planning for the next phase. Joanne Johnson, who manages CrossFit Neuro in Brisbane, has already taped off areas to ensure her members are socially distant at all times. "Just going to know what their perimeter is to work out in a safe environment," Ms Johnson said. CrossFit Neuro is prepared to cap numbers of staff and members inside the gym. Athletes will soon have to sign into an allocated timeslot. "We won't be sharing really anything in the gym. Equipment will be allocated to a designated area that will be cleaned before and after," she said. Her members will also have their own cleaning equipment in their designated workout space. Booking systems will also help with contact tracing later down the track, should that ever be required. What about doing laps at the local pool?Many operators have admitted it's too costly to keep their facilities COVID-safe while they're restricted to allowing just 10 people in a pool at a time. Paying staff and extra cleaners, as well as heating costs, meant it was not viable for many local pools to reopen until restrictions are lifted further. Brisbane City Council said all 22 of its pools would remain closed "until further notice". A big hit is coming for investors as an end to interest-only home loans combines with coronavirus, experts warnLakes and lagoons are potentially the best option for the time being and SEQWater's Mike Foster said all its facilities were "very much back and open for business". He said policing social distancing would be an added responsibility for staff and park rangers for the foreseeable future. "In many ways we're asking the community to really manage themselves and self-police themselves," Mr Foster said. "It all makes common sense, we know if we do it, it gives us our best protection so there's plenty of ways to continue to enjoy the wonderful outdoors."It's business 'unusual' in the workplaceThe Commonwealth Bank is one major corporation that has kept about 80 per cent of its office staff working from home during COVID-19. That equates to about 20,000 people who will now begin a phased approach to returning to their offices. Those who are already working at the office are temperature-checked upon arrival. The bank has also been operating split teams that rotate between home and office since the pandemic began. Westpac has about 22,000 employees working from home. "Westpac is planning a phased approach for how employees can return to office locations safely over the coming weeks and months," a spokesperson told the ABC. Follow the red arrowed roadTica Hessing is a human geographer and tenant adviser at Cushman & Wakefield, based in Sydney. The commercial real estate company has developed a concept called the "Six Feet Office" and has spent the past week remodelling it. The space includes stickers on the floor indicating a 1.5-metre distance from desks and cubicles. There are even red arrows to encourage staff to move around the office in a clockwise direction, to help people avoid bumping into one another. "It's not only about the physical workplace, but it also helps with changing the behaviour of people in the workplace," Ms Hessing said. The office innovations were the brainchild of their colleagues in the Netherlands and were put into action to ensure more staff could safely work in close proximity. "We have the sneeze guards in place so that people can actually sit opposite each other," Ms Hessing said. How about lunch with a colleague?Before coronavirus, Perth's Yagan Square was a mecca for business workers at lunchtime. Shy John Brewery & Yum Cha has been closed since March, but is reopening with a hostess who will advise patrons about the restaurant's strict new protocols before they dine in. The venue can hold up to 300 people, but the biggest change is restricting patronage to no more than 20 guests at a time. General manager Justin Lim said they had redesigned the layout to ensure social distancing between guests and staff for the foreseeable future. "But it'll be up to our team, predominantly our host and the managers on duty together, to make sure that we work in line with those guidelines as well," he said. Mr Lim said guests would also be temperature-checked and that returning workers would notice big changes to the restaurant's operation. "The scheduling side of things, the kitchen operation, our menu, has to be minimised to be able to make it work, otherwise it's just not going to be cost-effective," he said. Kuan Sub Lee, who owns the Gangnam restaurant nearby, said the new restrictions, while far from business as usual, were a necessity. "I was building my customers and I feel like I have to do it again," he said. The 'new norm' for the 'foreseeable future'Michael Kidd from the Federal Government team assisting with the COVID-19 response said while a roadmap to recovery had been provided, it would be up to individual businesses to make their own plans for the months ahead. "Each business will need to look at what they're doing and look at the guidance which is being provided and then decide how does that apply to our business," Professor Kidd said. "Where people are coming into work [it's about] making sure that not everyone is coming in at the same time, so that we don't have crowding in the areas where people come in and out of the business."Staggered starts and flexible working arrangements have been recommended, as well as continuing to have staff work remotely where possible. "It will be for the foreseeable future because we don't know how long we're going to be living with COVID-19 in Australia," he said. "So, the measures that are put in place now are probably going to be measures which we need to continue to follow for many, many months."
More than 200 staff and residents at an aged care home have tested negative for coronavirus after a nurse earlier tested positive, sparking a COVID-19 emergency at the Rockhampton facility. Key points:Staff and residents at the North Rockhampton Nursing Centre have tested negative to coronavirusThe circumstances prior to a nurse testing positive are under investigationThe daughter of one resident says she heard about the nurse testing positive in the mediaQueensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said 235 people at the facility had tested negative, with another 37 results to do. Earlier, 35 residents from the North Rockhampton Nursing Centre had been relocated to the Mater and Hillcrest private hospitals as testing got underway. Plans to move the elderly residents were announced by Deputy Premier and Health Minister Steven Miles after an Enrolled Nurse at the facility tested positive for COVID-19 on Thursday night, more than 10 days after she is believed to have become contagious. The home was placed into lockdown. The incident sparked fears of a repeat of Newmarch House, the Sydney coronavirus cluster that has seen the deaths of 16 aged residents and 69 infections. In a statement, Queensland Health said moving the residents would ensure those who may have been in contact with the infected staff member could be appropriately isolated for the required isolation period. Nurse went to work after being testedThe nurse, who is understood to have been working at a reception desk and not in direct contact with residents while she had symptoms, is now in isolation. The Central Queensland Hospital and Health Service says the circumstances prior to the positive diagnosis are under investigation because she was onsite after being symptomatic and after being sent for testing. How the nurse became infected is still unknown, but tracing is underway to track her movements after a trip to Brisbane before she became sick. Queensland Chief Health Officer Jeannette Young said the nurse had an "essential purpose" to travel to Brisbane but she had been left "speechless" that some people were still not following warnings to say at home while unwell. "She wasn't providing hands-on care to the residents which is a good thing, but she did have contact with people which is why we're being extremely cautious."Dr Young urged all residents in Rockhampton who had "any symptoms" to step forward to be tested and said a second fever clinic would be opened in the central Queensland town today. She said the nurse had been out in the community during that time and it was impossible to trace everyone. Meanwhile, a new fever clinic at the CQ University, north of Rockhampton, will be open from 9am-4pm seven days a week to help cope with more requests for testing. Resident's daughter heard news on TVThe daughter of one 95-year-old resident at the Rockhampton aged care home said she found out about the health scare from a TV news report. Cathy Garvie's 95-year-old mum, Beryl Goddy, lives in the Ivy Baker Ward at the North Rockhampton Nursing Centre, which is the wing at the focus of the scare. "I was watching ABC 24 News and I saw it come up there," she said. "I think they [the centre] had lots more things to think about than worrying about us. They had the patients to think about and everything."Ms Garvie said she had visited her mum on Thursday, the day the nurse was diagnosed. "You had to buzz to be let in and then they listed all the symptoms, 'did you have all these?', and then they took our temperature," she said. "I've always taken all precautions with it. I always wear a hand-made mask when I visit the unit and I clean my hands as I go in and I clean mum's as we go [outside]."Ms Garvie is now in isolation waiting for her own coronavirus test results. "I feel well and my temperature has been 35 for the last few tests I've had over the last couple of weeks," she said. "I have every confidence in the staff there, so I haven't really been that worried. "I've rung them up and wished them all the best and got updates on how everything is going."What are the state guidelines?Jeanette Young issued an aged care direction as a result of the coronavirus public health emergency. Anyone visiting a Queensland aged care facility must have an up-to-date influenza vaccinationUp to two people can visit for a maximum of two hours on a particular dayAnyone providing essential goods, health, medical or pharmaceutical services can enterVisitors are permitted for end-of-life supportAnyone who has returned from overseas in the past 14 days, had contact with a confirmed case, or has any symptoms cannot visitChildren under 16 cannot visit unless it is for end-of-life support
India is in no man's land. Thousands of confirmed COVID-19 cases are being added every day to the national tally, but it's not enough to guarantee disaster is on the horizon. Around a third of all coronavirus cases have recovered and the death rate is relatively low, but victory is not yet in sight. Health experts have continued to say just a few more days of lockdown would give a clearer picture of where the country is headed, but after more than six weeks there's still no answer. India has now surged past 90,000 confirmed cases and is recording more than 4,000 new cases a day. It has also passed China's tally. And yet the country, groaning under huge internal economic and social pressure, is easing restrictions to get the economy moving again. Interstate trains are resuming operations to get poor migrant workers back home, posing a real risk of spreading the coronavirus to rural areas where medical services are poorest. So how did it get here? And why, after six weeks of one of the world's strictest lockdowns, is the country still in such an uncertain position? Here's what we know. The Good: Early lockdown measuresSix weeks ago, I wrote that India was doing relatively OK, especially compared to Australia. I made the assessment not only because the number of confirmed cases was low, but because India was acting in an assertive and confident manner that appeared to be lacking in the west. Australia was in the midst of a panic buying frenzy as numbers jumped, and policy-makers were flipflopping about mass gatherings — such as Formula One or rugby league — while India was shutting down borders, schools, cricket matches, and even Bollywood, in what seemed to be a methodical fashion. Then India imposed one of the world's strictest lockdowns, when confirmed cases of the coronavirus had just passed 500. Almost everything, except essential services and businesses that related to food or medicine, was shut, causing a sudden shift in community sentiment — as if confirmed cases had shot up. But along with some unease, there was also a sense of national pride. India, it seemed, was tackling the issue head on. "India started off reasonably well," said the Public Health Foundation of India's Professor K Shrinath Reddy. "India did take several measures that were fairly effective and ahead of many of the western countries."According to researchers at Oxford University, who have rated the strength of lockdowns across the world from zero to 100 using a "stringency index", India's lockdown scored the highest rating of 100. In comparison Australia — which at the time had four times the confirmed cases — scored 63. And even when Australia had the same number of cases as India, its lockdown measures scored 34. "There was a great sense of vulnerability, because of the large population and the overcrowded slums and cities," Professor Reddy said. "As well as the relatively weak health system, and the frightening images of overwhelmed health systems and hospitals coming in from Europe and North America. "That led to the decision that we must have a lockdown, and there was not much resistance to the lockdown from the general public."The Good: Extraordinary humane social responseIndia's measures suppressed the curve and hospitals have not been inundated as many had feared, although experts have suggested the country's young demographic is likely to have helped the latter. "If you look at deaths per million, we are way, way low down," Professor Reddy said. "1.27 deaths per million population compared to 700 plus in Belgium and more than 200 in Europe, and close to 200 in the US."Many of India's cases are concentrated in a few metropolitan areas and hotspot clusters, which have been quarantined, while more than 40 per cent of India's regional and municipal districts — accounting for a quarter of the population — have been labelled "green zones". This means they have not had a confirmed case of the coronavirus for at least 21 days. The southern state of Kerala, a region renowned for quality health care and high literacy rates, was the first state to register cases of COVID-19 and of the more than 500 confirmed cases its had since, only about 30 are still active. It has become the envy of India after it responded to initial cases with rapid testing, contact-tracing, clear communication to combat false rumours, and even home delivered meals for school children stuck at home. But according to Professor Reddy, the situation across India can't be characterised in a "unitary fashion". "The southern states, especially Kerala, had an extraordinarily efficient public health response, as well as a humane social response," he said. The Bad: Not enough testing and 'PPE not being available to everyone'While India's aggressive lockdown and social distancing measures were praised by the World Health Organization, the country's initial response was lacking in another crucial area: testing. Its testing regime focused on those with symptoms who had been contact with a confirmed case, or who had travelled to a hotspot country, but it's now evident asymptomatic cases were slipping through the country's defences. "No lockdown can be 100 per cent foolproof," renowned public health expert Anant Bhan said. "People were allowed to go out and get milk, to get groceries, to buy vegetables and there were cases, for example, where that was the source of infection [or] sometimes it was through delivery of food, like pizza delivery."Home to more than 1.3 billion people, India's testing regime per capita was always likely to rate low — although it has increased the number of daily tests from around 5,000 in late March to just under 100,000. The country appears to now be paying the price for its slow start. "We never really knew how much it had spread in the community prior to the lockdown and during the lockdown," Dr Bhan said. "A lot of police and health care workers got infected because the infected ended up being asymptomatic as well."The state of Maharastra and particularly its capital Mumbai, the country's financial and entertainment capital, has been the hardest hit, accounting for a third of all coronavirus cases. Hundreds of neighbourhoods in Mumbai have been turned into containment zones, where residents cannot leave. More than a 1,000 cases have been recorded in Asia’s largest slum, Dharavi, where social distancing is near impossible to maintain. Hospitals last week ran out of beds for critically ill patients , and at least 15 hospitals have been partially or fully placed into quarantine, after doctors and nurses became infected. According to Dr Bahn, there were a few reasons behind this, including "poor quality personal protective equipment or PPE not being available to everyone". "Bhilwara is a city in southern Rajasthan where the infection spread was traced to a hospital, a very busy hospital," Dr Bhan said. "Probably, a patient came in and infected the [health care] providers, and they ended up spreading it to patients."The Ugly: Millions of migrant workers left without an incomeWhen India's lockdown was announced, Prime Minister Narendra Modi gave just four hours' notice, leaving millions of migrant workers who live hand-to-mouth without an income or a bed as factories and construction sites closed down. Lines of young men desperately trying to walk hundreds of kilometres to their home town or village, without food or water, became a common sight in Delhi and other cities during the early days of the lockdown, while those left behind were turned into beggars. "It's worse than I ever imagined," journalist Saba Naqvi said. "They were proud people. Many of these people work with their hands — they have been reduced to a condition where they have to beg for food."It prompted Mr Modi to apologise to the poor for causing "immense suffering" and the Government to announce huge relief packages and set up quarantined accommodation for migrant workers. But it remained on the backfoot. At least 47 people have died due to starvation, 26 to exhaustion, and 83 to suicide due to lockdown hardship, according to a study by a group of academics and activists. Last week, 16 migrant workers were crushed to death after falling asleep on train tracks as they tried to get home. Many have defended the Government's snap decision to impose a lockdown, saying migrant workers would have exited cities en masse anyway, elevating the risk of the virus spreading. But Professor Reddy is doubtful. "The migrants, because of the nature of their occupations and the places of their stay, would have had very little exposure to the virus," he said. "They could have been assisted in returning home."The Ugly: A mass event and Islamophobic fake newsThe ferocity of the coronavirus's ability to spread became clear after an outbreak at a congregation of supporters of the Sunni Islamic movement, Tablighi Jamaat, in defiance of the city's restrictions on mass gatherings. It prompted anger to again start mounting towards Muslims, just weeks after deadly violence erupted between Muslims and Hindu nationalists in the nation's capital. Islamophobic rumours started taking off on social media, and Muslim workers and street vendors were being chastised. "When the event broke out, we immediately knew what was to follow," said journalist Archis Chowdhury, who authored a study on fake news for factcheck website Boom Live. "We were doing one fact check every day about a rumour that was targeting Muslims with false allegations of spreading coronavirus purposefully."Chowdhury said a video showing a couple of Muslim youths licking plates "went viral [falsely claiming] Muslims are spreading their spit and the coronavirus with it". "It's a very old video from 2018 and it's of the Dawoodi Bohra community, who have this practice of licking their plates clean to avoid wastage of food," he said. So what's next for India?India may be at a crucial turning point, but it will have to make many more manoeuvrers in coming weeks and months. "It is absolutely improper to start marking [how India is going] at this stage," Professor Reddy said. "We've seen how South Korea has had a setback; we've seen how Singapore has had a setback. "We have to mark stage by stage and start learning. How fast a learner you are, and how fast you apply those learnings, is going to be important. "Now comes the big challenge."
A few weeks ago, at the end of a video call with a friend who works at Tamworth Hospital, we were saying our goodbyes and I told him: "I love you". This expression of tenderness was not a first for our friendship, however, the manner in which it was received — earnestly reciprocated and not deflected with a joke or a melodramatic reply — was. This sincere desire for closeness has manifested itself again and again in conversations with the men in my life, leading me to me hope that perhaps one of the unintended positive consequences of the COVID-19 crisis is that it may help us redraw the socially acceptable limits of masculinity. To say that this new-found sensitivity has taken me by surprise would be an understatement. Australian masculinity is kind of like a VB ad: there are almost imperceptible changes over time, but the underlying theme remains the same. You need only look to the archetypes of our national identity — the swagman, the ANZAC, the battler, Ned Kelly, Crocodile Dundee — to see that we have historically defined ourselves through a lens of rugged, stoic masculinity in which men avoid overt displays of emotion lest it undermine their self-image of toughness and laid-back larrikinism. But what if the pandemic is an opportunity for Australians to rethink our rigid ideas of what it means to be a man — for the better?A more caring way of being a manThe crisis has forced us to collectively re-evaluate fundamental aspects not just of our own lives but society as a whole. The social isolation we're experiencing has made many of us grapple with our interconnectedness and, in particular, how to maintain social bonds while we're physically apart. The lingering spectre of death and disease is a constant reminder of the things we can no longer take for granted, including our loved ones. With these uplifting thoughts in mind, in late March I resolved to start telling the people I care about how much they mean to me, and one major change I've noticed is that the men in my life are suddenly more willing to open up about their feelings and be vulnerable in a way they previously wouldn't have. And, it turns out, I might not be the only one. "There has been a trend [among men] towards more openness and authentic models of friendship in recent years, where genuine trust and closeness are valued," says Associate Professor Steven Roberts, who studies men and masculinity at Monash University. "The lockdown offers the possibility for an expansion of these behaviours."Men whose idea of maintaining friendship previously extended as far as texting "Pub tonight?" every few months are suddenly teeing up virtual coffee dates weeks in advance to candidly discuss their mental health. Social isolation, says Roberts, "is forcing us all to confront our need for intimacy, it's making clear we are all vulnerable."That's not to say this disruption will result only in positive changes. According to Associate Professor Michael Flood, who researches men, masculinities and violence prevention at Queensland University of Technology, crises such as pandemics can completely upend traditional gender roles. For example, the HIV-AIDS crisis in Africa "took such a profound toll that it interrupted many men's ability to be the breadwinners," Flood says, "either because economies collapsed or because of other rapid economic changes". As conventionally "masculine" norms became harder to embody, he says, "some men responded to the loss of that traditional male power through backlash. That is, there were increases in domestic and sexual violence against women."While we don't yet know exactly how the COVID-19 pandemic will affect the rate and severity of violence in Australia, some frontline workers are already reporting an increase in requests for help from victims of domestic violence. And a UN Women report published last month found that violence against women has intensified around the world since the outbreak of COVID-19. However, the potential for an increase in men's violence as a result of factors like economic upheaval and unemployment is by no means guaranteed, which is why a re-evaluation of what it means to be a man in our society is so necessary. Flood says there has been much greater community awareness and discussion about the "value of care and care work" in recent weeks. This "greater valuing of human mutuality, interdependence and community as key means of surviving ... and supporting each other through this pandemic", he says, has the potential to change our conception of manhood. For example, while women are still shouldering the majority of caring responsibilities, the Workplace Gender Equality Agency has found men are taking on more care and domestic work as a result of flexible working arrangements necessitated by the COVID-19 crisis. This slight redistribution of domestic labour represents an opportunity to value a new, more caring way of being a man. According to Roberts though, some pockets of society seem to have reverted to "old social norms". "Some have called this the return of the 1950s housewife, with women undertaking the large bulk of domestic duties and caring responsibilities, including home schooling," he says. What might a new, modern masculinity look like?Even if lockdown does lead to positive changes to gender roles, is it possible to maintain them post-pandemic? And if so, what might a new, modern masculinity look like?"There are opportunities [for men] to develop deep and profound empathy in this current crisis ... but whether we can sustain it is unclear," says Roberts. "One thing we can do as individuals and as a society is more overtly celebrate deviations from traditional masculine norms."Whether that's opening up about our feelings, prioritising a healthier work-life balance, or initiating housework without expecting praise, there are numerous ways men can start redefining masculinity for themselves. "A big difference is having a personal experience of a different life, a different way of living," says Flood — which is exactly what COVID-19 has given many of us. My personal experience is that there is a genuine desire among men to forge a more caring conception of masculinity. In the past two months I've seen previously stoic men break down over their anxieties about what the future holds. I've listened to them intently describe their newly discovered closeness with their children and disclose that, when this is all over, they don't want to go back to the way things were. There is a profound relief to be found in no longer trying to embody an unattainable idea of manliness, in loving and allowing yourself to be loved, in admitting that everything's not alright at a time when it so obviously isn't. Letting people know how you feel, asking for help when you need it — being vulnerable — isn't weakness, it requires strength. Which is why I'm vowing to keep telling the men in my life that I love them, and I encourage others to do the same, not just for our own sake but for that of the people around us. Because we can get it Skypin', we can get it typin', we can get it callin' our mates, a new-found masculinity needs a big old crisis and the best old crisis is COVID. COVID-19. We can get it carin', we can get it sharin', we can get it makin' a vow, matter of fact I've got it now.
Cruise ships have been linked to hundreds of cases of coronavirus across the country, but some Australians are keen to get back on board as soon as possible. Key points:Temperature checks and fewer passengers could be part of the changesSome companies are offering tickets on cruises for SeptemberTourism Minister says there are no guarantees when cruising will be allowed to resumeHowever, a holiday on the high seas will look drastically different when ships are allowed to again set sail. The industry is working on new health protocols that could include temperature testing and a reduction in the number of passengers allowed onboard. Cruise Lines International Association represents the major cruise companies and its Australasia managing director, Joel Katz, said the industry was figuring out how to operate in a world with no COVID-19 vaccine. "This virus really thrives in social situations — there is nothing more social than a cruise," he said. Changes to every aspect of cruising are currently being considered in an attempt to convince governments it could start up again in a way that would not lead to hundreds of infections. Mr Katz conceded there was no quick fix and all options were on the table. "[That includes] the health questionnaires that [passengers] will be required to fill in, the screening, testing, every aspect of the onboard operation including the onboard medical capabilities all the way through to when the guest gets home," he said. Changes to how guests interact are also being examined and could include reducing the number of passengers allowed in theatres and offering more meal sitting times so tables and chairs can be better spaced. Cruising this year? Depends who you askThe industry was shut down as coronavirus spread across the world, with high levels of infections connected to ships that docked on the east and west coast of Australia. Just months later, some operators are planning on setting sail in September and are offering special deals to lure customers. But Deputy Chief Medical Officer Nick Coatsworth has made it clear Australians should not be booking such a holiday yet. "There will be an opportunity and time to consider whether cruise ships are the right place to go, but I would suggest it is too early at this point in time," he said. That medical advice is not deterring Australians, though, with many booking tickets for travel in coming months. Kathy Pavlidis manages Travel Associates in Kew, Victoria, and said customers loyal to particular cruise lines were already planning international trips. "I've had five bookings just this week and they can't wait to get back on board," she said. Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham urged Australians not to book holidays that are currently banned. "There are no guarantees about when any of the activities will restart," he told the ABC. "Certainly no guarantees about international travel and definitely no guarantees about international cruise shipping."Tourism during uncertain timesCruises are just one part of Australia's tourism industry, which is in the process of developing new rules for operators to follow while COVID-19 remains a threat. Tourism and Transport Forum chief executive officer Margy Osmond said it was about providing clarity during uncertain times. "Everything from what social distancing looks like on a tour bus, what are the sort of provisions you need to put in place in a theatre or art gallery, potentially what it looks like when people go camping again," she said. "Over the next few weeks you will see some more standard views from across the industry about what's thought to be the baseline. "We hope that will make governments and consumers feel more confident about all of their travel options."Ms Osmond said COVID-19 provided an opportunity for tourist operators to think outside the box and suggested the cruise industry could offer more trips within Australian waters if health authorities approved the move. "Once the state borders open it's not impossible that we will start seeing cruise options around Australia in the last quarter of this year," she said. Mr Katz said cruise operators will consider putting on more local trips while international travel remains banned for Australians. "I would expect we will see more domestic or possible regional itinerary options in that initial start up phase," he said. But do not expect the Tourism Minister to get behind the idea. Senator Birmingham said he would rather people stay onshore. "The most important focus of our tourism recovery will be on attracting visitors to stay in our towns, supporting Australian businesses to get back on their feet," he said. "I will be urging them [Australians] to firstly get in their cars and drive across regional Australia wherever they can and when we get to point state borders are opened, to hopefully get on planes and head to some of the other great destinations around the country."
I know many of you are finding lockdown challenging: negotiating appropriate backgrounds for Zoom meetings, supervising kids' lessons, baking up a storm. Like you, we are missing time with family and friends. But we have something extra to contend with. In January 2013, when I was 43 and our daughter Kimi was six, I received the shocking diagnosis of motor neurone disease (MND). I was a seemingly healthy academic, a swimmer and runner, an active parent and partner, a hugging friend. Now, my body is completely paralysed, except for my face. A ventilator pushes air in and out of a tube in my neck to keep me alive. I cannot speak. I communicate with a NeuroNode strapped to my wrist, cleverly transmitting my tiny muscle twitches as signals to my phone. On the plus side this means I am not at risk of touching my face with corona-coated fingers. But it also means that my family and I are more vulnerable than most to COVID-19, and not just because of my weakened body's inherent susceptibility. We are more vulnerable because I am dependent on a team of carers to do everything for me — from hoisting me out of bed to wiping my eyes (and arse), from feeding me lunch to suctioning my airway clear, from keeping my machines running to repositioning sore joints at 3:00am. It's impossible to be isolated with this team of nine carers who work shifts in our home, or to keep two metres away from the people who are washing my "charm"-pits or tipping condensation from the tube that pushes air in and out of my lungs. The absence of paid sick leave that is a shitty fact of life for casual workers becomes a dangerous disincentive to staying away and waiting to be tested if they develop symptoms. And it's best not to contemplate what would happen if infection of a team member or their contact necessitated all of us quarantining. I have learnt to appreciate the 'gift of life'Like others in the MND community I am particularly grateful for the work Australians have done in flattening the curve. I want ICU beds to be available not only for the people with COVID-19 who need them, but for others needing hospital care to give them a shot at staying alive. I have been one of those people several times in my seven years with MND, sometimes with a little notice, such as when I had a supra pubic catheter inserted just before I lost the capacity to stand up from the loo, even with (generous) help; more often catapulted in by a respiratory crisis. My most recent ICU "holiday" started with losing six hours to near-fatal carbon dioxide narcosis, continued with a life-saving tracheotomy and laryngectomy, and finished with a long, slow period of recruiting and training carers. That nine-and-a-half months in ICU, along with my years living with MND, have turned out to be good preparation for the current restrictions. I have learnt to appreciate the gift of life, to find pleasure in small things, to accept the derailment of plans, to adapt, to live in the present, to be grateful for (immense) kindness, to connect with others online, to cope with loss of control, to try to make the most of each day, to forgive myself when I stuff up, to welcome help, to laugh, to manage confinement (in my hospital bed, my immobile body), to trust, to view modest outings as a treat, to enjoy the life of the mind, to know how wonderful it is to be home with my beautiful, beloved family. Spare a thought for those just diagnosedThis month we celebrate MND week. Normally we gather, a community united in hope and remembrance. We participate in MND awareness campaigns and fundraising walks; we sell and wear cornflowers. This year, there are virtual gatherings and events, such as Cornflower Blue Day and Australia Moves 4 MND. I am lucky that this is my eighth MND week since my diagnosis. Typically people live two or three years, many for less. My heart goes out to those dealing with recent MND diagnosis — a mortality rate of 100 per cent, not one or two per cent — in this time of isolation. Please spare a thought for those trying to process this devastating news now, having only the screen version of health professionals like my fabulous neurologist, Professor Dominic Rowe. They are having to forgo closeness and hugs when they are most needed, and missing out on what might be their last opportunities to swim or work or go to the pub or attend family weddings or travel, making memories for their kids in the shadow of what will become our global collective memory. They're also unable to meet face-to-face with other people with MND or MND association advisers, contemplating death at a time when the number of mourners allowed at funerals is limited. Thank youAs a potential beneficiary, I say a heartfelt 'thank you' to everyone making sacrifices to flatten the curve. Thank you to our political leaders working together to make difficult decisions. Thank you to our dedicated healthcare workers for doing what you can to minimise mortality: I hope you can stay safe. Thank you to health communicators and broadcasters for keeping us informed. Thanks to essential workers for providing care, teaching, producing food, making masks, delivering pizza, researching, selling toilet paper, troubleshooting technology, first-responding, collecting garbage and more. Thank you to those who are finding themselves or their businesses reliant on or ineligible for welfare: I sincerely hope our taxes are raised and our safety net is widened and permanently strengthened. Thank you to comedians, musicians, dancers, writers and actors for spreading joy. And a huge thank you to everyone who's being kind to those around them, washing their hands and keeping their distance.
Alcohol will be back on the menu at South Australian restaurants and cafes from Friday, as the State Government brings forward the relaxation of some coronavirus restrictions. The change will see restaurants will be able to seat up to 20 patrons — 10 indoor and 10 outdoor. South Australia's previous restriction roadmap contemplated restaurants only allowing 10 outdoor diners, with no alcohol until June 8. Now, pubs and clubs will be permitted to open on June 5, the Saturday of the Queen's Birthday long weekend. South Australia has had just one case of coronavirus detected in the past 28 days.
No parties, no pubs, no smooching with a stranger and definitely no one night stands. COVID-19 has undoubtedly had a huge impact on the sex lives of Australians. But while the world has been consumed with the trajectory of one kind of virus, some sexual health clinicians are quietly pleased with the mellowing out of another. In the ACT, there was a 52 per cent reduction in the number of people testing positive to gonorrhoea in April, compared to the average of the past five years. And, following a national trend, there was a 34 per cent decrease in the recorded cases of chlamydia. Although we do not have a full picture of the data yet, experts say the pandemic could be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to drive down the rates of sexually transmitted infections (STIs). "Nationally, that data won't be available for quite some time," Canberra Sexual Health Centre director Sarah Martin said. "But we've all worked very hard to reduce the spread of COVID-19. And for some people, this might also have meant less partying with casual sex, less chance of infection. "I think we've had an opportunity to slow down."Dr Martin's clinic, along with many others, have changed the way they do regular sexual health check-ups during COVID-19. Patients have been asked to phone ahead for an initial assessment, and only those considered high risk have had face-to-face appointments. That might be skewing the data — with fewer people to test, the lab could be returning different results. But Dr Martin said it was likely at least some of the reduction in cases was because of what was effectively an enforced period of celibacy. Now is the chance to break the chain of infectionDr Martin said she was aware that a lot of people were keen to get their sex lives back on track once coronavirus restrictions eased further. That is why she is urging people to get their STI tests now, even if they have no symptoms. "Some people might not feel they need testing now. Others might have decided to delay testing for a while. And others again, might have found it more difficult to access testing than usual," Dr Martin said. "[But] now it's an opportunity to think through how to stay safe."ACT Labor politician Tara Cheyne agreed with Dr Martin, and said getting tested was a no brainer. Last year Ms Cheyne told the ACT Legislative Assembly that she contracted chlamydia at age 21, in a speech calling for action to reduce the stigma around sexually transmitted diseases. "It was incredibly straightforward, it wasn't a big deal," Ms Cheyne said. "What would have been a big deal is if I didn't get tested and if I didn't get treated."Ms Cheyne also agreed that there is no better time to get tested than now. "I think there's probably something almost a little bit sexy in itself about being confident in your own mind and of your own health, that you are STI free," she added. "For many STIs the treatments are very simple. It can be as simple as taking one or two tablets and waiting a week."Dating could forever be differentThe return to what has been dubbed 'regency-era courtship' by those in the dating game has led to many a meme, and many first dates have been conducted via video chat during the coronavirus pandemic. Sexologist Kym Robinson said that, while she was not sure all her single clients had been following the strict physical distancing restrictions, she was hopeful the focus COVID-19 placed on infectious diseases would transfer to safe sex practices and prevention of STIs. "We're talking a lot more about social distancing and ways of protecting ourselves like hand washing. I'm hoping that people are going to put a little bit more thought into safer sex practices," Mrs Robinson said. "Perhaps I'm a little optimistic, but I'm hoping that's going to then transfer onto the STI rates."While it might be anxiety inducing to have safe-sex conversations with potential partners in a post-shutdown world, Mrs Robinson said it is better than the alternative. "If you don't get checked, those are actually more tricky conversations," she said. "Imagine how much more difficult it'll be later, when you say we need to use a condom because I have something that I don't want you to catch."
Victorian health officials have accessed a coronavirus patient's COVIDSafe app data for the first time. Key points:Health officials on Monday identified that a Victorian who tested positive to coronavirus had downloaded and registered the appIt is the first time Victorian health authorities have made use of the app and the first publicly announced use of the app in AustraliaThe coronavirus patient gave consent for the data on the app to be downloadedThe Federal Government smartphone application records when users have been in proximity to other smartphones with the app to help authorities track down people who may have been exposed to the virus. A Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) spokesperson said a coronavirus positive patient who had the COVIDSafe app registered on their phone was identified on Monday. It is the first time Victorian health officials have been able to make use of the app. However, it is not known if other app users have been in the proximity of the user who contracted COVID-19. The Federal Health Department has refused to say whether the app had already been used elsewhere in the country however it was the first publicly announced use of the app. The DHHS spokesperson said the patient gave consent to health authorities to use the data on their phone, which was downloaded to look for potential contacts. "Access is strictly limited to trained public health officers carrying out contact tracing functions," the spokesperson said. "Victoria has legislated privacy obligations when handling citizens’ private data or health data and these obligations will be adhered to. "With only a small number of cases in Victoria, there have been few opportunities to use the app so far. "We hope this continues."How does the COVIDSafe app work?The COVIDSafe app relies on Bluetooth to detect other users of the app that are within range. When it detects another user, it exchanges an encrypted packet of information containing the name, age range, postcode, mobile number, date and time and Bluetooth signal strength of the contacts. That data is stored on a user's phone for up to 21 days. If a user tests positive for COVID-19, they can upload their stored contacts to a central repository held by the federal Health Department. That data is then made available to state health authorities for contact tracing.
In Fiji, pristine bungalows sit empty, sparkling resort pools have no-one swimming in them and thousands of employees who would usually be on hand to greet tourists with wide smiles have been left without work. While COVID-19 has shut down the Pacific Island country's biggest industry, Fiji hopes it won't be for too much longer. The Government wants to see Australian and New Zealand tourists return "as soon as possible" and is pushing hard to become part of the "travel bubble" the two countries are planning. So, when could Australians be back sunning themselves on a beach in Fiji, what are the risks and benefits of reopening borders in the region and what do other Pacific Island countries think of the "travel bubble" idea?Should I start saving for a ticket to Fiji?While discussions between Australia, New Zealand and Fiji are underway, there is still no timeframe on when travel to Fiji, or other pacific island countries, could resume. But Federal Liberal MP and co-convenor of the Parliamentary Friends of the Pacific Group Dave Sharma told the Lowy Institute we could see travel resume to some Pacific Island countries this year. "I'd be hesitant to put a timetable on it, but I expect towards the end of this year — 2020," he said,"I would think we should have some parameters in place that would be allowing us to commence this sort of thing and possibly even sooner."Australia and New Zealand have made it clear that re-establishing travel between themselves is their initial priority, and even that could be some months away. Once we have established travel arrangements across the Tasman, Prime Minister Scott Morrison has also said we will "explore opportunities to expand the concept to members of our broader Pacific family". But all countries are being very cautious in their approach — they want to be confident the risk of spreading COVID-19 from Australia and New Zealand into Pacific Island countries is mitigated, especially because they so far seem to have avoided the worst of coronavirus. The Fijian Government has formally requested to join the bubble and behind the scenes, the country is seen as a frontrunner among Pacific Island countries because of its interest, its tourism industry and its experience with COVID-19. However, Fiji's Attorney General Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum says "these decisions aren't made overnight". "We've obviously put our hand up, we want to look at how we can place ourselves in a more prime position," he said. How would the arrangement work?Australia's High Commissioner to Fiji, John Feakes, said the "hard work" in terms of creating travel arrangements will be hashed out by Australia and New Zealand in the initial stages of the bubble. "Once the work has been done to open up the Trans-Tasman bubble, we will look very quickly to include Fiji in that as well," he said. "But our principal concern is to make sure that the health of New Zealanders, Australians and Fijians is protected."Medical and health considerations will be at the forefront, but issues such as travel insurance, quarantine and testing measures and whether tourists are restricted to certain areas of countries, all need to be agreed upon. Australia and New Zealand have started an expert panel to look at protocols for Trans-Tasman travel and there have been some calls to include Pacific Island stakeholders in the discussions. What about concerns over spreading COVID-19?The ability to trace and respond to potential cases of COVID-19 will also be a consideration. Seemingly in response to this, Fiji is about to start a trial of its own version of the coronavirus tracing app. Mr Sayed-Khaiyum said the country is "feeling good" about how it has responded to the coronavirus, through contact-tracing and lockdowns. It has recorded 18 cases of COVID-19, but no new cases in the past four weeks. But its testing rate is still well below Australia and New Zealand, and there are some early concerns about how effective the app will be in the country. The numbers of COVID-19 cases have been equally steady in most Pacific Island countries, but there is a push to increase antibody testing in the region to ensure cases aren't being missed. Australia, New Zealand and the World Health Organisation are currently delivering almost 100 000 GeneXpert testing cartridges to Pacific Island countries. Pacific countries have experienced devastation from introduced diseases in the past, most recently when measles killed more than 80 people in Samoa. In the face of their vulnerabilities, most acted quickly to protect themselves from COVID-19 and they'll be careful not to jeopardise that now. What do other Pacific Island countries think of the 'travel bubble'?While Fiji has been the most forthcoming about wanting to be included in the "travel bubble," other countries across the region have had different reactions. Vanuatu has confirmed it has had talks with Australia about the idea. While its economy is also heavily reliant on tourism, it has been incredibly cautious about reopening its borders given it has not recorded any cases of COVID-19 so far. The Cook Islands, another tourism dependent economy, has expressed interest in reopening borders. Other Pacific Island countries that haven't recorded any cases, especially those with smaller tourism industries, have also expressed some hesitation. But a Pacific bubble is about more than just providing beaches for Australians and New Zealanders to sun themselves on. It could provide new trade opportunities in the region and reopen travel for Pacific workers who visit Australia and New Zealand under specific labour schemes. Papua New Guinea Prime Minister James Marape said he had held discussions with his Australian counterpart about the travel bubble between Australia and New Zealand. "We're sensitive to those discussions, but Mr Morrison has told me they kept Pacific Islands out of discussions simply because most have almost nil presence of COVID-19," he said. PNG's borders will remain closed until at least the start of June, but its national airline has continued flying to Australia throughout the lockdown period, to collect freight. Mr Marpae said he told Mr Morrison PNG is developing a "protocol on international travel". The Secretary General of the Pacific Islands Forums, Dame Meg Taylor, said several Pacific countries had approached New Zealand and Australia about being included in the bubble. She told an Asia Society Policy Institute event that while everyone wants to see things reopen, it will "take time" and the first priority "is that people stay healthy". "We just don't have strong health systems, health services and health infrastructure," Dame Meg said. "If you're going to open up, you've got to have some kind of security there so that anyone coming into your country, and your citizens as well, feel secure enough that they will be taken care of if there is a case that comes into the country."So why is Fiji so eager to join?Tourism is the country's biggest industry, bringing in about $1.37 billion ($2 billion Fijian) and accounting for 35 per cent of GDP, and Australians and New Zealanders account for about 75 per cent of Fiji's tourists. But no-one has been coming to the country since it closed its borders at the end of March, to protect against the coronavirus. As a result, as many as 100,000 people are thought to have lost work in Fiji and there are growing concerns about the wellbeing of workers who have been laid off. Tony Whitton — managing director of the Rosie Travel Group, which operates two resorts — said he had to stand down 600 workers without pay because the business has no income coming in. "It's been the most heartbreaking aspect of our business — our business has been in operation since 1974, this is the first time that we've had to initiate a furlough," he said. In the midst of the coronavirus lockdown, Fiji was also hit by Cyclone Harold, and the economic impact will likely see a recession, or possibly even a depression. Mr Whitton said the sooner tourists can safely start returning, the better. "The greatest aid that Australia and New Zealand can give us at this time is the tourism dollar," he said.
It's still too early to know how profoundly coronavirus will change our societies, but it's clear we'll be living with the shockwaves for years to come. This pandemic will alter the course of history in ways we can't predict — just like those before it. Along with wars, economic changes and technological developments, outbreaks of infectious disease have radically shaped the world we live in today. Perhaps the most infamous is the bubonic plague, which ravaged Europe for centuries and resulted in the Black Death, the global pandemic that struck Europe and Asia in the mid-1300s. We've also heard a lot recently about the Spanish flu pandemic of 1918, which killed millions of people around the world. But lesser-known epidemics and pandemics have also left an indelible mark. Here are four. The Great Plague of AthensThe first documented epidemic in history unfolded right back in the time of the Ancient Greeks. In 430 BC, a deadly disease swept through ancient Athens, a great city at its peak — and at war with the Spartans. In the three years that followed, about a third of the population — as many as 100,000 people — were killed, including the Athenian leader Pericles. The outbreak led to a breakdown of society, and arguably played a role in the eventual defeat of Athens. We still don't know what the devastating disease was: over the years typhus, typhoid, malaria, smallpox, bubonic plague and Ebola have all been offered as the culprit. "I think the best argument has been made for smallpox," Jo Hays, professor emeritus of history, tells ABC RN's Rear Vision. Athens never returned to its former glory and power. Smallpox and the settlement of the AmericasSmallpox changed the future of the Americas after the arrival of Christopher Columbus at the end of the 15th century. "Columbus landed on the island Hispaniola, and there was a native population of Arawaks," historian Frank Snowdon says. "Columbus imagined that he was going to subjugate the Arawak and reduce them to slavery, but this proved impossible because they died. "Within a generation the population had been reduced to 10,000 out of several million, and this was exclusively due to the effect of smallpox."In the years that followed Columbus's voyage, many species of plants and animals crossed the Atlantic Ocean for the first time, in what is sometimes known as the "Columbian exchange". Diseases — many apparently new to the "virgin soil of the Americas", like smallpox, measles and plague — were part of that exchange, says Professor Hays. He says these diseases collectively resulted in the deaths of around 90 per cent of people in the Americas, although there's argument around just what the populations were. "Some people have said [the population] might have been as much as 100 million, others say, no, it's probably only more like 10," he says. "But what is certainly true is that by the end of the century, by 1600, if the population of the Americas was 100 million, it was now 10 million. And if the population was 10 million, it was now 1 million."Unable to enslave the Arawak, Europeans instead turned to Africa. Professor Snowdon says this fuelled the growth of the African slave trade. "Because Africans possessed many of the same disease history that Europeans had, they possessed herd immunity and they were suitable for being enslaved," he says. "So this New World slavery is also a legacy of this lack of immunity or possessing immunity. It was a decisive factor in the whole history of the settlement of the Americas and also Australia and New Zealand."Yellow fever, a slave rebellion and the rise of the USIt wasn't just Columbus whose colonial plans were stopped by infectious disease. Napoleon Bonaparte lost control of the Caribbean colony of Saint-Domingue, now Haiti, because of an epidemic. In 1789, the year the French Revolution began, the French colony was the richest in the world, its wealth created by the labour of half a million black slaves producing sugar, indigo, cotton, cocoa, coffee, and tobacco. In August 1791, the slaves began a revolt to overthrow the French. Professor Snowdon says it was "the biggest slave rebellion in human history". "Something like 50,000 soldiers and sailors were sent to Saint-Domingue to crush the rebellion," he says. But unlike the slaves, the soldiers had no herd immunity to yellow fever, which was rife in the region. By the summer, 80 per cent of the soldiers had died, and the other 20 per cent were too sick to fight. "Napoleon accepted this defeat, withdrew the attempt to restore slavery, and so we have the beginning of decolonisation," Professor Snowdon says. "In addition, Napoleon realised that he didn't have a base for his ambitions in North America, and so he sold, to Thomas Jefferson, Louisiana. "This was the Louisiana Purchase of 1803 that doubled the size of the United States. "So we see yellow fever playing a huge geopolitical role in reorienting the balance of power among the great powers of the period, and we see the emergence of the United States as a very significant regional power to eventually becoming a global power."Cholera and class conflictCholera first appeared in the 19th century, during the Industrial Revolution. It was a time of mass urbanisation, Professor Snowdon says, and with that came overcrowded housing, terrible hygiene practices, and the threat of food and water being contaminated. "Cholera gave rise to enormous social tensions because it was clearly a class disease. People in the slums of Naples or Paris or London could see that with their own eyes," he says. "The people who were middle-class in their midst seemed to have this strange immunity: doctors, priests, the officials of local government. "That's because doctors and priests and officials didn't actually move into the tenements, they didn't take their meals there, they didn't drink the water there."But the poor thought there was a more sinister reason for it: that the disease was a deliberate attempt to rid cities of poverty. "So one sees riots in times of cholera and enormous tensions," Professor Snowdon says. The tension was reciprocated by the wealthier classes. They already feared the working class politically, and now feared them as bringers of disease. "I believe that this is a feature — not the cause, but a feature — in the violence of the repression of social uprisings in the 19th century," Professor Snowdon says. He says in Paris — "the most rebellious city in Europe at the time" — the 1848 revolution was met with extraordinary aggression. "And this was true as well after the Paris Commune [in 1871], which was extraordinarily repressive and violent and bloody," he says. Professor Snowdon says cholera "greatly sharpened" the fears and resentments on both sides of the barricades. "So yes, cholera was a disease of the Industrial Revolution that thrived on social tension and helped also to create it."What will the future hold?The 1918 Spanish flu outbreak was not only the worst pandemic of the 20th century, but also the deadliest in history, killing some 50 million people worldwide. There was a moment in the 1960s and 70s when, with the advent of antibiotics and vaccines, we thought infectious disease was a thing of the past. But we now know that isn't the case. Professor Hays says the modern world is also far more complicated than it ever has been; our populations are more urban and more mobile, so disease can spread faster. We're also living longer, and are more vulnerable as we age. "I think also we continue to rely on what are ultimately political choices where if we are going to combat a disease, we have to decide what is worth spending money on, how and when we are going to spend it," Professor Hays says. How history will record coronavirus is yet to be determined, but experts agree there will be lasting consequences. "It does look as though our world will never be the same. Quite likely the disease will be lasting and endemic and we will have to live with it for a long time," Professor Snowdon says. "I'm not talking about the apocalypse, I'm talking about living together with a dangerous pathogen … that we don't seem to have a clear way of eradicating."He predicts that the way we live and work will change: handshakes will become a thing of the past, we'll rely less on public transport, our economies will be transformed, the entertainment world will take on a new form. "I suspect also that people will learn the lesson at last that our healthcare systems … have to be built in such a way that healthcare is available to everyone, because that's part of the story of the spread of coronavirus, is so many people not having access to healthcare," he says. "I think we are going to be fundamentally transformed as a result of this."
For Cynthia Calderon, working from home won't end when the COVID-19 pandemic does. She set up a home office a year ago to spend more time with her son on Fridays when he wasn't at school. Far from getting in the way of her career goals, she was given a promotion. "It was reassurance that if you work and you deliver, then it doesn't matter if you are in the office or at home, you get what you deserve," she said. Ms Calderon works in corporate affairs at engineering and construction company Clough and said more of the firm's staff would take up flexible work after trying it out during the pandemic. Her husband Ricardo Herrera, an engineer at Rio Tinto, has been working from home for the first time and believed the flexibility would stick in his workplace too. Childcare a shared responsibilityThe couple said this would help them share the load at home, which was something they were already working on. When their baby arrives in July, Ms Calderon said she would take the first six months of parental leave before heading back to work and handing over care duties to her husband for at least three months. "Cynthia is a high achiever and I did not want to stop her from work," Mr Herrera said. "I'm a bit scared to be honest, but I think this is a once in a lifetime opportunity to create a bond [with the newborn]."Rigid workplace structures have traditionally been a major barrier for women who, like Ms Calderon, don't want to give up their career due to caring responsibilities. But that has started to change in recent years and some believe an accelerated shift to workplace flexibility could be a silver lining to come out of a pandemic that has disproportionately affected female workers. The 2019 KPMG report She's Price(d)less identified key drivers behind Australia's gender pay gap and opportunities to effect change. Some of these have advanced during the pandemic, including improving work-life balance, increasing the availability of flexible work and increasing the availability of childcare or decreasing its cost. Benefits of working from homeWestern Australia has the nation's biggest gender pay gap at 22 per cent, and Tania Cecconi from CEOs for Gender Equity wanted employers to seize some of the opportunities. "One of the biggest benefits [of the pandemic] has been this huge shift to working from home, which has demanded flexibility for the first time in many organisations that have never delivered it," she said. "Roles that demand a lot of travel or are very inflexible typically lock out women with caring responsibilities. This time has demonstrated that in fact we don't need to have as much travel. "We cannot waste a crisis and I think one of the best learnings is that there are gains to be made and progressive organisations are already looking at the gains."Overall, the coronavirus pandemic has disproportionately hit female workers, with some dubbing it a "she-cession" amid fears it would reverse gains made toward workplace equality. Labour force economist Conrad Liveris said ABS data showed 58 per cent of jobs lost in WA since February belonged to women. He said this was primarily because women were more likely to be employed in part-time roles and female-dominated industries had been the hardest hit. While the most recent payroll data had shown a much steeper decline in men's wages, Mr Liveris said this was likely due to the Federal Government's JobKeeper payments kicking in. Gender pay gap forecast to widenIn WA's mining industry, for example, wages were down 30.8 per cent between March 14 and May 2. "We are likely to see an increased gender pay gap in Western Australia and across the country," Mr Liveris said. "With JobKeeper and decreased male wages we might see it even out a little bit. But over a two-year period, we will see an increase."But he said it wasn't all bad news. "I don't think we can say it is overall a completely negative picture for gender equality, there are some opportunities there," he said. "When we start looking at flexible working and maintaining the childcare sector, those are real opportunities to support women back into the workforce longer term. "Flexible work and working from home were already increasing but now we have an evidence base that all of the things we thought could work, actually can. "I think we will see more men spending more time on care and at home and women working a fair bit more."Childcare 'key to equality'University of Melbourne sociology Professor Lyn Craig said improving workplace flexibility would mainly benefit white-collar workers. "[Working from home] is a thing that happens at the higher echelons and women are disproportionately not [seen] at the higher echelons," she said. "Women are in high contact jobs that are not able to be done apart from in person."She said other opportunities to improve equality had been highlighted during the pandemic, but they would require government investment. She said childcare should stay free, wages should be increased in female-dominated industries such as healthcare, childcare and education that had proven vital, and economic stimulus should be spent in those sectors. "We often think of stimulus as infrastructure — roads and bridges — and that this is what makes the economy work and is nation-building," she said. "But in an economy that is heavily service-oriented, essential infrastructure includes things like childcare, because it makes it possible for those jobs to happen. "With great times of crisis comes great opportunity so it is possible that this will turn out to be a turning point, but it will depend on the opportunities being seized."Professor Craig said the free childcare initiative introduced during the pandemic, which was likely to end soon, was the most obvious way to improve equality. "It is uneconomic for most women to put their children into childcare for more than three days a week, so most of them don't," she said. Public sector reform mootedIn March, the WA Government launched a 10-year plan to address gender inequality, which included a target of 50 per cent women in top-level public service positions. Women's Interests Minister Simone McGurk said the state had struggled with a gender equity problem for many years. "We have had the highest gender pay gap in the country for a number of decades now and we need to do better," she said. "It is something we are committed to [improving] and we are calling on industry to be aware of these challenges as they rebuild post-COVID-19. "There are a lot of opportunities [out of the pandemic]. For instance, the ability for people to work from home, to work different hours, to have more flexible practices. "Some of our private sector are leading the way in that. In the public sector we need to get better at that."
Fuzzy pictures, distorted sounds, internet signals that freeze or drop out — we're all experiencing problems with videoconferencing in our lives. Key points:Victorian courts have had to change how they run because of the coronavirus pandemicThe courts are using more videoconferencing for remote hearingsDespite delays in some cases, senior judges say the arrangements are ensuring justice is done in VictoriaBut for Victoria's Chief Magistrate, Lisa Hannan, the COVID-19 pandemic has added complications — how to juggle 145 magistrates over 51 jurisdictions across the state, as well as the needs of thousands of lawyers and defendants. "There are occasional technical glitches," Chief Magistrate Hannan said. "But this is a learning exercise amongst other things."At the Melbourne Magistrates' Court, the number of videolink hearings has doubled to a recent peak of 244 a day, as a result of the pandemic. "We have transformed what has been largely a paper-based court to a court that is now hearing Webex hearings," Chief Magistrate Hannan said, referring to the online meeting software. Chief Magistrate Lisa Hannan told the ABC every change to the system had been carefully considered. Before the pandemic took hold, 2,000 people went in and out of the Magistrates' Court in Melbourne every day. Now, traffic is about a tenth of that. On any given day, only half of the rostered magistrates are working at the courts, with the rest working from home. Only the most urgent cases are being heard — such as bail applications and plea hearings, as well as cases involving those in custody, or people making family violence applications. Some lawyers and some prisoners or remandees are still attending court, but only if physical distancing can be achieved. Courts face tech constraints and deliver email judgmentsThe Criminal Bar Association of Victoria's vice-chair, Sally Flynn QC, said there had been problems with the number of links available and time restrictions that applied to videoconferencing. "Certainly it's difficult when you don't have ready access to your client, for example if we're dealing over videolink, or an instructing solicitor," Ms Flynn said. Victorian Legal Aid's director of criminal law, Dan Nicholson, said that was especially so for the most vulnerable clients in the system. "[For] our clients who have disabilities or require interpreters, it can be harder for them to participate in their hearings when they are done remotely," he said. While lawyers agree the system under COVID-19 as it stands is not perfect, some say the courts needed to change before the pandemic struck. Mr Nicholson said there were opportunities for a better system overall if the courts could improve the technology and the processes used. "Unfortunately the experience of a lot of people at court on the day is paper-based chaos really," he said. Across the varying court jurisdictions there's been a rapid and radical shift since the pandemic began, as large sections of the work of the courts has moved online. The biggest change is that jury trials have been suspended because of the risks of having groups of people together for extended periods of time. Emergency legislation allows judge-only trials but defendants have to consent to a judge-only hearing. As yet, the ABC understands that no applications have been received in any Victorian court. The Court of Appeal has continued to operate as usual, while commercial and civil matters in the Supreme Court are also proceeding. There are few, if any, people in court. The Supreme Court is upgrading its technological capabilities to host more web-based hearings, allocating staff to help set up virtual hearings. Some rulings are even being made via email. Finding a way to keep the courts running"Shutting the doors was not an option," the Supreme Court's Chief Justice Anne Ferguson told lawyers in a recent webinar hosted by the Victorian Bar Association. "[The change] has shown us we didn't need to be afraid," she said. "There's a real upside, an opportunity to drop the barriers to look at different ways to do things because we've had to."Traditionally, the industry has been heavily dependent on in-person meetings — whether it's an initial briefing with a client, or court hearings. For those who are in custody, court restrictions are being exacerbated by a prison ban on visitors, which means lawyers have to rely on telephone and video links too. Ms Flynn, from the Criminal Bar Association, said it was important lawyers could communicate with their clients. "It's imperative that we have access to clients to be able to get instructions to effectively act for clients in court and properly represent them," she said. Matters are also being adjourned until much later in the year, in the hope hearings can return to some kind of normalcy at some point. Delays prompt a rise in bail applicationsFor Ms Flynn, the delays are concerning. "Justice delayed is always justice denied and it is important that we try to minimise those delays as much as possible," she said. Chief Magistrate Hannan admits there will be a backlog. "Justice may be delayed in some cases but we will work very hard to ensure those cases are heard as soon as possible," she said. The delays have prompted a spike in the number of bail applications, as lawyers argue the restrictions within prisons on visitors and inmate programs because of the coronavirus pandemic are denying their clients timely justice. Earlier this month, inmate Mark Rowson's lawyers argued he should be released because he was at risk of dying if a coronavirus outbreak occurred in the prison. The system under COVID-19 restrictions also disadvantages those who want to represent themselves, because they are not linked in to the court's communications system and they are currently unable to access public libraries and public legal resources. There are also concerns about what happens to clients who can't meet bail or Community Corrections Order conditions, because of disruptions to alcohol, drug and other court-mandated services. Is the new system fair enough?Some lawyers are worried the many changes made to court practices during the pandemic could lead to an uptick in challenges and appeals. But Chief Magistrate Hannan rejects the idea that changes have been made too quickly. "I don't accept that anything's been done on the fly," she said. "We have considered each and every change that we have made. "The practice directions have been considered in terms of their impacts upon all stakeholders. "Justice hasn't changed, just the mode of delivery."County Court Chief Judge Peter Kidd told ABC radio last week that the courts were working in a compromised environment, but said the system was delivering justice. "It's not a perfect environment, it's not business as usual," he said"But is it more than satisfactory so that justice is done? The answer is yes."
The coronavirus pandemic has exposed gaps in Australia's manufacturing capability however "complete self-sufficiency" should not be Australia's goal, according to the Federal Industry Minister. Key points:Global supply chains have been disrupted by coronavirus shutdowns in other countriesLocal manufacturers have ramped up production of key health and food supplies during the pandemicKaren Andrews says there is a groundswell of support for Australian-made productsIn a speech to the National Press Club today, Karen Andrews is expected to say there was a "a lot of scepticism" that local manufacturers could quickly ramp up demand for personal protective equipment like face masks, ventilators and hand sanitiser in response to COVID-19. "When we first began preparing for this crisis I was told that Australia would not be able to make more than about 37 million surgical masks a year – we're now expecting to produce more than 200 million this year," she is expected to say. "I refused to accept the advice that Australian manufacturers would only be able to fill small gaps in supply. "Capability exists in this country. What was needed was a change in the culture of how we think about our capability, about how we challenge the status quo."The pandemic has brought Australia's reliance on other countries into sharp focus, with Ms Andrews saying disruptions to global supply chains were a wake up call for many businesses. However, she argued the future of local manufacturing was not about "re-living a golden era". "While COVID-19 has brought issues such as sovereign capability to the forefront and, frankly, exposed gaps in our manufacturing, I am not suggesting that complete self-sufficiency should be our goal," she said. "There are many things Australia won't and shouldn't be making, but it is clear we cannot just rely on foreign supply chains for the essential items we need in a crisis. "We can't supply all our wants locally, but we have to be able to supply, or at least pivot our production processes to produce the goods we need. "And we need to compete on value, not on cost."The Minister said manufacturing had faced its own "existential challenges" over many decades and that while the decline of Australia's car industry attracted a lot of attention, other sectors such as food and beverage production were growing even before the pandemic. In her speech, Ms Andrews is expected to argue that cutting red tape across all levels of government was the most significant change that could be made without drawing on taxpayer funding, saying the crisis had shown changes that would normally take years could be made within weeks if necessary. "[Industry group] Manufacturing Australia cite the fact that a factory can be proposed, approved, built and operational in America in less time than it takes to jump the very first approval hurdle in Australia," she will tell the Press Club. "That's simply not good enough."She also is expected to say there is a "groundswell" of support from Australian consumers who will continue to demand more locally-produced products as the nation emerged from the crisis. "There's a real sense that in a post-COVID world, where norms have indeed been disrupted, there will be an adjustment of our fast, disposable, retail approach," she said. "A return to quality over quantity."
Brisbane woman Amy Buchanan had little idea what to expect from her first pregnancy — let alone one in the midst of a global health emergency. Key points:Expectant mum Amy Buchanan was told she might have to give birth to her first child on her ownThe global study will survey 10,000 women and partners about the care they received before and after their birth amid COVID-19Many women have reported feeling anxious, isolated and alone while pregnant during the pandemicThe 31-year-old's first child is due in a fortnight and the wait for its arrival has been anxious. Prior to coronavirus restrictions being lifted, Ms Buchanan was faced with the prospect of having to give birth to her first child alone — without her husband, family, trusted medical team or support network. "It would have been terrifying," she said. "We don't know what to expect, so it isn't just navigating pregnancy for the first time but navigating it during a health crisis. "We were unable to do birthing classes at the hospital, or to do group education sessions or hospital visits — all of that stuff was cancelled. "So not only are you potentially birthing by yourself but you also don't get the education in the lead-up to it."Complicating matters further, Ms Buchanan and her husband are also both frontline workers at the Caboolture Hospital, where coronavirus positive patients have been admitted. "It's such a new virus, we don't know whether I could contract it and pass it on to the baby via vertical transmission or what that would mean," she said. Global study to track pandemic pregnanciesAn Australian research centre is leading a new global study into how maternity services, pregnant women and new mothers have been impacted by the outbreak of coronavirus. The Stillbirth Centre of Research Excellence said the project hoped to survey 10,000 new mums and pregnant women, and their partners. Principal investigator Vicki Flenady said researchers would focus on the use of telehealth appointments, the psychological impacts of social isolation, and the support offered to families. "There's a concern with the move to telehealth for routine antenatal care [before and after birth] that we might be missing important opportunities to keep mothers and babies safe," Professor Flenady said. "We want to hear about these experiences from women to ensure we are giving them the best care. "Most hospitals have stopped running large antenatal clinics and [are] only seeing those women at more increased risk, so there's a concern that some women may be falling through the cracks. "We got some real anecdotal evidence from women saying how anxious they are about the change in the care, the feeling of isolation and being alone during this time."Professor Flenady said the results of the survey would be used to improve current and future maternity services for pregnant couples in a health crisis. Several countries were already onboard with the project including the United Kingdom, Ireland, Spain, Italy, Germany, France, Canada, India and Laos. 'Stronger mothers for this'Mary Thomas and her husband Bo welcomed their daughter Polly on May 9 and the new parents said while there were moments of nervousness leading up to the birth there were positives to being in lockdown. "I actually like that it's lockdown — I loved having just Bo and I during labour and not having visitors, so it was optimal bonding time for babe and I," she said. "I still feel really supported but also not overwhelmed as I couldn't imagine having visitors over every single day."In the weeks before giving birth, Ms Thomas said she had an epiphany about having a baby during a global pandemic. "As a mama-to-be, struggling to find that sense of calm as [I was] about to give birth during these uncertain and fearful times — I had an epiphany that changed my perspective around this entire situation," she said. "As I was packing my hospital bag, I started to cry, about to reach for my phone and call my husband for reassurance [but] something stopped me. "It was the figures of strong women in my family who birthed before me."She said it was time "to remember the lineage of strong women before you and where you came from". "Harness that collective power within and bring that with you when you birth your beautiful baby into this world," she said. "What will our babies' generation bring? The babies that were born during a pandemic? They're a force to be reckoned with. "They're the game changers, the leaders, the creators, the peacemakers — we will all be stronger women, stronger mothers for this."Virus impacts services, behaviours of pregnant womenProfessor Flenady said the question of how best to care for women and families during a pandemic was one being considered by health professionals around the world. "We'll be able to compare the experiences that women are having during this time against the different policies that are in place across countries," she said. "We hope to learn a lot from that in terms of what's acceptable and what sort of step we need to put in place to support women at this time."Professor Flenady said while current evidence indicated pregnant women were not more severely affected by COVID-19 than the general population, the pandemic was affecting the delivery of antenatal services and the behaviours of pregnant women. "There's no evidence to indicate that pregnant women are more susceptible to COVID-19 or that their babies are at any particular increased risk," she said. "However, the worrying consequence of the outbreak is that women are maybe reluctant to seek medical attention when they need it. "Such as when they experience warning signs of decreased foetal movement and this may put them at increased risk of stillbirth. "We know that stillbirth is not a rare occurrence, six families a day endure that heartache of a stillborn baby, so we want to understand women's concerns more."
NSW schools will see students back in the classrooms next week, but its not going to be business as usual for children and teachers amid remaining coronavirus restrictions. Key points:State students will return to full-time campus learning next MondayMs Berejiklian said it will become "common" to see schools close from infectionsHowever, kids are at low risk of being infected with coronavirus, experts saidNSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian previously said she wanted kids back in the classroom from Term 3, beginning July 21, but has since brought forward the date by about nine weeks. "The health advice is very clear: a return to full-time face-to-face teaching is safe," Ms Berejiklian said. Under the new guidelines, students will be able to use the school library, continue with apprenticeships, attend after-school care and mingle in the schoolyard. However, school excursions including camps, as well as work experience, debating and sport with other school communities will not be permitted. Are all Australian students going back to school?No — in NSW, all public school students have been ordered to return to the classroom next Monday, but Catholic and private schools are under no obligation to follow suit. NSW Catholic Schools said it aimed to have all 250,000 students back by the end of May, though no exact date has been provided yet. In Queensland, about 80 per cent of state school students returned to campuses full-time this week, and the remainder are set to join next Monday. In Victoria, all state school students will be in classrooms again by June 9, with students in preprimary, Year 1, Year 2, and Years 11 and 12 to return next Monday, too. Are children at risk?It's "extremely rare" to see COVID-19 cases among children both in Australia and overseas, consultant paediatrician Kirsten Perrett told the ABC. "Most of the time [with] respiratory viruses such as influenza, children are actually more susceptible to infection and severe disease, but this is not the case that we're seeing with COVID-19," Dr Perrett said. This may be because kids' immune systems are better at dealing with infections that they've never seen before, Dr Perrett explained. "If this was influenza," infectious disease physician and microbiologist Peter Collignon added, "we would keep schools closed until this was over". How will schools keep students safe?School students will not be required to socially distance from their peers, but have been told to maintain a 1.5-metre distance from their teachers and other school staff. Good hygiene practices will be encouraged, like washing hands regularly, avoiding sharing food or drinks and coughing or sneezing into the elbow. The Department of Education said it had provided schools with unlimited supplies of soap, sanitiser, disinfectant wipes and personal protective equipment (like masks). High-contact areas on campus, like door handles, lockers, light switches and handrails, will continue to receive additional cleaning, the department said. Students will receive priority over other passengers on public transport and will not be turned away from boarding a service, the department added. What if a student tests positive?If a case of coronavirus is found within the school community, lockdown protocol — including calling in health authorities, closing the school and contact tracing — will continue to take place. Since the pandemic began in March, numerous Sydney schools have shut temporarily after a confirmed case, including Epping Boys High School, Normanhurst West Public School, Warragamba Public School and St Mary's Senior High School. Ms Berejiklian said moving forward it would be "common ... for schools to be shut down temporarily". What if I choose not to send my child to school?Campuses have been open in NSW only for the children of essential workers for the past eight weeks, in a bid to slow the spread of coronavirus. However, from Monday, authorities have warned parents students will be marked absent if they are in good health but remain at home. "The message is schools return next week and students need to be back in the classroom," Minister for Education Sarah Mitchell said. "Rolls will be marked as per normal and unexplained absences will be followed up. "You should be at school — as long as you are well."
Parts of Australia are slowly beginning to wake up after a coronavirus-induced hibernation, with businesses and activities gradually returning to normal. But that doesn't mean flipping a switch and things going back to the way they were before. The Prime Minister recently announced a three-step framework, detailing how certain industries can start reopening to the public. But it's up to each state and territory to decide how and when they roll back their restrictions, and which businesses will be allowed to do what. It's also up to each state and territory government whether restrictions return if COVID-19 cases start to rise again. Here's what we know so far about some common activities. When will gyms reopen?Step one of the national three-step frame work doesn't permit any indoor physical activity, including at gyms. But it does allow up to 10 people to participate in outdoor sport, and some gyms and boot camps have taken advantage of that by offering limited outdoor classes if their location allows. Some states are keener than others to start working off all that extra Uber Eats. Gyms are open in the Northern Territory, but you shouldn't be there for more than two hours (props to you if you're working out longer than that). In Western Australia, up to 20 people can now participate in indoor and outdoor fitness classes as long as there's no shared equipment. Indoor gyms are still closed in New South Wales and Victoria — NSW says outdoor exercise equipment can be used "with caution", while Victoria says don't touch it. Up to 10 people are allowed to join outdoor gyms or bootcamps in Tasmania, the ACT and Queensland. South Australia has a 10-person limit for outdoor non-contact sports at the moment, and gyms are flagged to reopen on June 8. Step three of the national framework says venues can welcome up to 100 people at a time, so lots of owners are in the process of working out how they're going to implement those limits. One condition of gyms reopening to up to 20 people at a time is that they must adhere to the four square metre rule (so some smaller gyms may have to limit their attendees to even less than 20). Every gym has their own COVID-19 plan, so contact your facility to see how they're implementing it and the conditions of their reopening before you go. What about cinemas?No cinemas yet — but in some places, they're not far off. The national framework says indoor movie theatres can open for up to 20 people in step two and up to 100 people in step three. Queensland is adopting this part of the plan for stage two of their roadmap, which is expected to begin on June 12, as has South Australia, where cinemas and theatres are to reopen on June 8. Cinemas are set to reopen in the Northern Territory on June 5, and Western Australia has also flagged reopening cinemas with gathering limits as part of their third phase of easing restrictions, which we should hear more about in the next few weeks. There's not a lot of detail available at the moment about what distances people would have to sit apart when cinemas do reopen. Cinemas and theatres in New South Wales are still closed for now, as they are in the ACT, Tasmania and Victoria (but Tasmania has flagged reopening cinemas to up to 20 people from June 15). Can I go to brunch?In most states and territories, you can — but the process might be a little different to what we're used to. Up to 20 patrons can sit in cafes and restaurants in Western Australia, but Queensland, Tasmania, the ACT and New South Wales venues are limited to 10 customers at a time for now. Outdoor dining in small groups has resumed in South Australia, as long as everyone is appropriately distanced. Table service is still not allowed in Victoria, but you can get takeaway. Restaurants, cafes, food courts and sports or RSL clubs are open again in the Northern Territory, but as with gyms, they have a two-hour time limit. Some restaurants and cafes require people to have downloaded the COVIDSafe app or to provide their contact details before they can dine at the venue for contact tracing purposes, and because of customer limits, pre-bookings are recommended. Or perhaps a nightclub?Sorry party animals — nightclubs aren't at the top of the list to reopen first in most places. The NT is ready to party though, they're reopening nightclubs, concert halls, dance halls and bars on June 5. Queensland has listed nightclubs as one of the venues that can have up to 100 people from July 10, but that's subject to further planning. Nightclubs have also been listed as a "future step for consideration" in South Australia, but there's no date on that for now. The national framework recommends nightclubs don't open until the third stage of the three-step plan — but when they do, they can have up to 100 people. It also recommends that places like brothels and strip clubs stay closed until further notice. I miss camping! Can I go?Not in Victoria, there's still a ban on camping in national parks there. Camping in a state park or campground is still prohibited in Tasmania too, but is flagged in their second stage of easing restrictions that starts on June 15, and campgrounds in the ACT are also closed. Campgrounds and caravan parks remain closed in NSW, unless you work or permanently live there. Queenslanders are only allowed to go on day trips at the moment, but from June 12 camping in national and state parks will be back on, and people can travel up to 250km from home to do it. But in South Australia, regional travel is allowed again and campgrounds and caravan parks are allowed to reopen, again with all the necessary social distancing. Camping is also permitted in Western Australia in accordance with travel restrictions — there are still some intrastate borders in place in WA, and campers must observe the 10-person gathering limit. Similarly in the Northern Territory, you can camp but you can't enter restricted biosecurity zones, so it's best to check what parks are open and the activities you can do there before you go. Can my footy team train and play?Organised training is allowed for sports teams in the Northern Territory, and playing team sports is expected to be allowed from June 5. In Western Australia you can play non-contact sport with up to 20 people (some contact sport is expected return in their next phase). Right now in Queensland up to 10 people can play non-contact sport outdoors, but from June 12, up to 20 people can gather for "non-contact indoor and outdoor community sport". Outdoor sports training is allowed in South Australia for up to 10 people, and competitive sport is flagged to resume from June 8, including indoor sport. The ACT is allowing up to 10 people to participate in social sport, as long as it's non-contact and outdoors, and up to 10 people can do non-contact training in Tasmania too. In Victoria, sport can resume if it's outside, non-competitive, everyone stays at least 1.5 metres apart and there's no more than ten people in a group — so if you can't modify your sport so there's no contact, it's not allowed. New South Wales also says people must stay 1.5 metres apart outdoors, and no more than 10 people can gather. I want all my loved ones at my wedding. Is that allowed?Depends how long your list of loved ones is. Restrictions limiting attendance at weddings and funerals have been particularly tough, but these are slowly starting to relax in most states and territories. The Northern Territory doesn't specify a limit on outdoor weddings, and in Queensland the current 10-person limit is set to increase to 20 from June 12 and up to 100 from July 10. Western Australian weddings can have up to 20 people inside or 30 people outside. Ten guests can also attend a wedding in New South Wales right now, not including the couple, celebrant and photographer. Victoria has a similar rule — 10 guests plus the couple and celebrant — same in Tasmania. The ACT also has a 10-person rule for weddings — there, it includes the couple, but doesn't include the celebrant and photographer. South Australia also includes the couple in their 10-person limit, but not a celebrant or "necessary staff". There's various social distancing and hygiene conditions to holding weddings no matter where you are, so check with your venue first. If you have guests who are interstate, don't forget some states and territories still have strict border restrictions in place. Guests may be forced to quarantine after crossing the border, or if they don't have the appropriate exemptions they may not be allowed to cross at all. When can my kids go back to dance class?Or basketball practice, or swimming lessons, or orchestra… It all depends where they do their extracurricular activities, and how many people are in the group. In Queensland, for example, from June 12, up to 20 people will be allowed at pools, community sports clubs, theatres, auditoriums, health clubs and yoga studios. The Northern Territory has already opened studios again for dance classes and organised training for sports teams is back on too. Outdoor sports training can go ahead in South Australia in small groups, and community halls and clubrooms can open, but they have to keep any indoor sporting facilities closed. But in New South Wales dance halls are still closed, as are all indoor recreation facilities and indoor public pools. The ACT allows small groups to play and train for social sport and for swimming lessons to take place, but all indoor and outdoor gatherings can have a maximum of 10 people including children. In Victoria, small group lessons at places like community centres "cannot resume at this time" and contact sport is off the table — but from Monday, new protocols will allow for some gathering-limited, socially distanced AFL and netball training to resume. Tasmania says any indoor venue used for sport and recreation can't open or operate, including those used for dance, cheer and gymnastics, but non-contact sports training is allowed in groups of 10. In Western Australia up to 20 people can partake in fitness and non-contact sports, swim in public pools or gather at community facilities. We've heard estimates about overseas travel not returning before 2021, and even that air travel might not fully go back to normal until 2023. But for now, all overseas travel is currently banned and exceptions to the rule are few and far between. There's a chance we could be able to visit New Zealand before international borders completely reopen, but there's no guarantees on that right now. That dream overseas holiday will have to wait a little while longer. The main thing to remember... Every state and territory is rolling back their restrictions differently. Within that, each business is coming up with their own plans to meet requirements based on their particular location, facilities, staff and style of operation. National Cabinet is reviewing the progress of easing restrictions regularly, as are state and territory governments, so there is a chance that restrictions could remain in place or even be brought back if safety is at risk. If you're not sure about something, check your state or territory government's website or contact the business directly to ask how they're doing things.
Health authorities in NSW have confirmed three new cases of coronavirus from almost 9,000 tests done yesterday, bringing the state's total infections to 3,086. Of the three new cases, all were overseas cases identified during the mandatory 14-day hotel quarantine, Dr Christine Selvey from NSW Health said. She said there was no risk of community transmission from those cases. Health Minister Brad Hazzard said it was crucial that high testing rates continued, particularly as eased coronavirus restrictions meant restaurants and bars would open their doors to more patrons. "It's absolutely essential as we move forward and we try to relax some of the restrictions we've lived under for the past few months," he said. He highlighted that one in five people who tested positive for coronavirus have been within the 20-29 age bracket. "I want to emphasise again the danger of young people who may be asymptomatic or might have mild symptoms," he said. "As we are freeing up our restrictions, particularly around clubs and hotels and so on … these young people who may think they are invincible, are actually not invincible. "With these freedoms come big responsibilities." Under the relaxed coronavirus restrictions from June 1, hospitality venues will be required to adhere to strict guidelines to operate: Mr Hazzard refused to comment on the specifics of the rules, reiterating that industry consultation was ongoing, but stressed that social distancing was essential to the success of eased restrictions. When asked about when beauty therapists can commence business again, Mr Hazzard said plans were in motion but did not provide a timeline. Mr Hazzard also announced a $34 million program to train physiotherapists to deal with the "horrific lung conditions" associated with the virus. 
The Australian coronavirus death toll has risen to 102, after a Victorian man died in hospital overnight. "Our condolences are with the family and friends of this person at this time," Victoria's Deputy Chief Health Officer Annaliese van Diemen said at a press conference this afternoon. "The person was a man in his 60s who died in a Victorian hospital. "The family wish for their privacy to be protected at this point so no further details will be given at this point in time." The state's 19th death comes after a week in which Victoria has been home to the majority of Australia's new reported cases. New South Wales recorded its 50th coronavirus fatality yesterday, after an 80-year-old Sydney woman who was exposed to the virus at an outpatient hospital clinic died. Victoria has recorded 10 new coronavirus cases since yesterday, including four returned travellers in hotel quarantine and six cases under investigation. None of the new cases are currently linked to the Cedar Meats outbreak in Melbourne's west, which sits at 111 cases including 67 staff. Updated Sunday, May 24 But Dr van Diemen said it was possible investigation of the cases could reveal links to the Cedar Meats outbreak or another cluster at the Fawkner McDonald's restaurant. "As we've discussed, some of these results come in quite late at night, so it does [need] quite a bit of investigating to link that into the other outbreaks or known cases, so we're just seeing what those investigations show us," she said. When asked about Victoria's historically high number of cases believed to be community transmission, Dr van Diemen said it was because the state was "testing more". "We're doing significantly increased testing compared to other states at the moment, so the more we test, the more we will find and we want to find these individual cases because we want to be able to put that ring around them and make sure there is no transmission," she said. "The harder we look, the more we will find." Victoria's state school students in prep, year 1 and 2 as well as years 11 and 12 are due to return to classrooms from Tuesday. When asked if Victorians using public transport should be using face masks, Dr van Diemen reiterated Federal Government advice that the majority of people would not benefit from wearing a surgical mask. "Our advice on top of that for commuters is to be very vigilant, don't use public transport if you're sick, be aware of physical distancing and ensure really good cough and sneeze etiquette," she said. She said health authorities were working closely with the Department of Transport and unions to look at possible measures to support physical distancing. 
In the past week, a rebadged conspiracy theory has been breathlessly promoted by the US President and conservative media pundits: OBAMAGATE! It's not worth discussing at length. But in summary, the story is essentially an updated version of a long-running fringe theory that the Obama administration and the nefarious "deep state" illegally sabotaged Donald Trump from the very start, partly by entrapping his former national security adviser Michael Flynn in the Russia scandal. There is no evidence to tether the vague narrative to reality. Even Trump, when asked for more details, has struggled to specify what criminal activity took place: "It's been going on for a very long time," the President recently mused. "You know what the crime is. The crime is obvious to everybody." Let's be clear; this entire theory is a diversion, a predictable move from the Trump political playbook. While "Obamagate" is being covered and debunked by media outlets, less time is spent reporting on the 90,000-odd Americans killed by the coronavirus, the Administration's slow pandemic response or the human cost of the worst economic crisis America has seen since the Great Depression of the 1930s. Steve Bannon, the President's former strategist, is often credited with best distilling this strategy. "The Democrats don't matter," he reportedly said in 2018. "The real opposition is the media. And the best way to deal with them is to flood the zone with shit." In an ideal world, media outlets would simply filter out the metaphorical faecal matter, reporting what's right and ignoring what's wrong. But in reality, the US industry in the digital age is more partisan than ever and certain sections are often diametrically opposed. Key figures, like the President, can also simply turn to social media to spread their messages. For journalists, following the range of competing narratives for a living can be tiring. For casual observers, making sense of what's accurate, what's exaggerated and what's fake can be completely overwhelming, particularly in an era where increasingly cash-strapped companies value conflict, sensational headlines and clicks above reasoned, fact-based coverage. Some people tune out totally: a few surveys suggest as many as two-thirds of Americans feel worn-out by the torrent of information. Many others retreat to their ideological corners, limiting themselves to programs, presenters and pundits that largely reinforce their preconceived world view. Consensus, even during a once-in-a-century crisis, is much harder to come by. Of course, Trump and his team didn't create this environment — but they do thrive in it. When the daily media cycle is going against them, it's often easily upended with an inflammatory tweet or outrageous press conference. If that doesn't work or a crisis lingers, alternate realities are promoted. During the historic impeachment trial, hours of airtime were dedicated to discussing and debunking theories about Joe Biden's son, Hunter. In the midst of the Mueller investigation, the longest-serving (right-wing) foreign minister in Australian history, Alexander Downer, was talked about as a Clinton-loving deep-state superspy. Even when fact-checkers are able to keep up, their findings can simply serve to elevate the initial fabrication. Arguably even this piece is part of the problem — how many of you had heard of "Obamagate" before now? The whole purpose of "flooding the zone" is to distract and muddy the waters to obscure inconvenient facts. New York University professor Jay Rosen and Vox journalist Sean Illing have written about this phenomenon at length, arguing the media has failed to adapt to Trump's tactics. At this point, it's worth emphasising the coronavirus crisis is totally different from anything else the Trump Administration has faced so far. Unlike impeachment or the Russia probe, the pandemic has upended the everyday lives of Americans. It's much harder to distract voters from something that's landing their loved ones in hospital or making it impossible to put food on the table. Trump's bungled response is pretty clearly on the public record too. He repeatedly, publicly diminished the threat of the virus, comparing it to the flu and stating that it would soon disappear, and failed to act early enough to contain much of the damage.  Several Republican and many Democratic strategists now believe that if this year's election becomes a referendum on Trump's record, he will lose. So far, the White House and the President's campaign have responded by increasing the amount of detritus in "the zone". "Obamagate" is just one note in a crescendo of recent attempts to rile the nation, spread misinformation and reignite old feuds. The President repeatedly attacked governors and smeared whistle-blowers. Trump's son, Don Jr, has even made baseless insinuations about Joe Biden. More than anything, these developments seem a sign of the Commander-in-Chief's distress. A recent national poll has him 11 points behind Biden. The pandemic may be narrowing his path to a second term.  As voting day approaches, the metaphorical "flood" is only likely to grow as team Trump tries to bounce back and keep this presidency afloat. 
Health authorities will not see the results of a Liberal Party survey of voters' views on easing coronavirus restrictions, SA Premier Steven Marshall says. The survey asked households to rank which restriction they would like to see eased next. Listed options included community sport, professional sport, international and interstate travel, festivals and concerts, weddings, funerals, places of worship, hospitality, gyms and cinemas.  Premier Steven Marshall said the individual Liberal MPs who authorised the survey would keep the results — and they would not be presented to the state's COVID-19 transition committee. "They haven't asked for it at this stage," Mr Marshall said.  "There is absolutely nothing wrong with getting information from your electorate, in fact, we encourage it. "I don't think it's something the Liberal Party is doing — there are Liberal members of parliament, there are Labor members of parliament … [getting] feedback. "It's done by all political parties." Labor MP Chris Picton said the COVID-19 restrictions survey was different to other political surveys — including those previously issued by his own party — because this one sought to use the coronavirus health crisis for "political ends". "This is not a legitimate exercise — it's a purely political exercise," Mr Picton said. "This is not going to the health ministry — it is not going to [SA Chief Public Health Officer] Nicola Spurrier and the health experts. "It's going to the Liberal Party as part of their political campaigning." Katina Michael from the University of Wollongong said data collection was critical to the way modern political parties operate — but it was difficult to track how data was used and stored.  "Political parties in Australia are exempt from the Privacy Act 1988, from the Spam Act 2003 and the Do Not Call Register Act 2006, so there's a lot of mystery surrounding what political parties do with the data they collect," she said. "Our laws need to catch up with what can and cannot be done in the name of elections, in the name of campaigning, in the name of service provision. "I think we have to start asking [these] questions." Professor Michael said survey recipients should exercise caution when responding to material received in the letterbox, over the phone or online.  "Not every survey we receive is a valid one — you have a choice [whether to participate]," she said. "[You should ask] what is the premise and the underlying motive behind that survey? "How is your data going to be used and what kind of feedback are you going to receive for the usage of your data? "Will it be stored for 'x' number of years, until the next election?" 
Spain will reopen its borders to tourists in July and its top football division will kick off again in June, Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez has announced, marking another phase in the easing of one of the world's strictest lockdowns. Mr Sanchez's dual announcements coincided with calls for his resignation over the lockdown's impact on the economy from the far-right Vox party, whose calls for protests in cities across Spain drew thousands of horn-blaring cars and motorbikes. "From July, foreign tourism will resume in safe conditions. We will guarantee tourists will not take any risks and will not bring us any risks," Mr Sanchez told a televised news conference, without giving further details. Foreign visitors contribute around an eighth of Spain's economic output and the Government curbs — taken to contain one of Europe's severest coronavirus outbreaks — shuttered everything from hotels, bars and restaurants to beaches and leisure parks just as its tourism season got underway. Spain's overnight death toll from the coronavirus rose by 48 to a total of 28,678, the seventh straight day the fatality rate was less than 100, while the total number of cases rose to 235,290. Restrictions on movement are being gradually eased, with bars in some parts of the country already being allowed to open their terraces, and museums and churches reopening — though residents of Madrid and Barcelona, both national epicentres of the virus, will only follow suit on Monday. Mr Sanchez said there would be a 10-day period of national mourning for victims, starting on Tuesday. Several-thousand followers of the Vox party gathered in their cars and on motorbikes in the centre of Madrid and other Spanish cities to protest against the Government's handling of the coronavirus crisis. The party accuses the Government and Mr Sanchez of lying about the impact of the health crisis and of violating Spaniards' rights by confining people to their homes and closing businesses during the lockdown. Vox called for protesters to attend the rallies in their vehicles and thus skirt the ban on social gatherings. Vox called the protest the "Caravan for Spain and Liberty". "We will never forget what they have done," Vox leader Santiago Abascal said from the open-top bus leading the caravan as it inched down a Madrid boulevard. "Do not doubt that we will make them face justice. They know it and fear our freedom. That is why they try to intimidate us." Most cars and motorbikes were decked with Spanish flags. There were also small groups of people who participated on foot, with some not respecting the 2-metre social-distancing rules. Protests were also held in Barcelona, Sevilla and other provincial capitals. Spain's Government said the confinement measures were necessary to save the nation's hospitals from collapse and to save thousands of lives. ABC/wires 
Three people claim to have been the target of a racially motivated attack early this week as they walked to the public toilets near a supermarket in Launceston. They said items were thrown at them, they were called "Corona", and a phone was hit from one of their hands as they tried to record what was happening.  Late Wednesday night, authorities confirmed no new cases of coronavirus had been diagnosed, with the state's total remaining at 226. Sarah Bolt, the state's anti-discrimination commissioner, said she had heard of other targeted racial incidents in relation to coronavirus.  "There has been a stark increase in the number of reports and inquiries in relation to discrimination on the basis of race, and the recipients of those tirades have been predominantly people from Asia or who are of Asian appearance," she said.  "And again, most of them have all related to COVID-19." This type of targeted racial abuse was condemned by police in Hobart in March, when a Hong Kong student was taunted and punched for wearing a medical face mask at a local supermarket. The student was with a friend in the New Town Plaza car park when a man shouted "you've got the virus" and "go back to your country". Ms Bolt said racially fuelled attacks created fear and anxiety for those on the receiving end. "I've spoken to members of the Chinese community who talked about people being frightened to go to the shops or to go about their daily business in fear of being attacked verbally, and even physically, and particularly being blamed for the coronavirus pandemic," she said. "So that sort of has limitations on how they can just enjoy their everyday life, and people tend to forget that many of the people who are of Asian appearance in Tasmania have been here for multi generations." While physical abuse is a matter for police investigation, verbal discrimination based on race can be referred to Equal Opportunity Tasmania for further action.  Elise Archer, the Minister for Justice and Corrections, said penalties could be enforced.  "That type of behaviour is deeply concerning to us as a Government, it's deeply concerning to me as the Attorney-General," she said.  "I have encouraged anyone that has experienced that sort of attack, that's racially motivated, to contact Equal Opportunity Tasmania, where the anti-discrimination commissioner can take on such a complaint." 
Parts of Australia are slowly beginning to wake up after a coronavirus-induced hibernation, with businesses and activities gradually returning to normal. But that doesn't mean flipping a switch and things going back to the way they were before. The Prime Minister recently announced a three-step framework, detailing how certain industries can start reopening to the public.  But it's up to each state and territory to decide how and when they roll back their restrictions, and which businesses will be allowed to do what. It's also up to each state and territory government whether restrictions return if COVID-19 cases start to rise again. Here's what we know so far about some common activities. Step one of the national three-step frame work doesn't permit any indoor physical activity, including at gyms.  But it does allow up to 10 people to participate in outdoor sport, and some gyms and boot camps have taken advantage of that by offering limited outdoor classes if their location allows. Some states are keener than others to start working off all that extra Uber Eats. Gyms are open in the Northern Territory, but you shouldn't be there for more than two hours (props to you if you're working out longer than that). In Western Australia, up to 20 people can now participate in indoor and outdoor fitness classes as long as there's no shared equipment. Indoor gyms are still closed in New South Wales and Victoria  NSW says outdoor exercise equipment can be used "with caution", while Victoria says don't touch it. Up to 10 people are allowed to join outdoor gyms or bootcamps in Tasmania, the ACT and Queensland.  South Australia has a 10-person limit for outdoor non-contact sports at the moment, and gyms are flagged to reopen on June 8. Step three of the national framework says venues can welcome up to 100 people at a time, so lots of owners are in the process of working out how they're going to implement those limits. One condition of gyms reopening to up to 20 people at a time is that they must adhere to the four square metre rule (so some smaller gyms may have to limit their attendees to even less than 20). Every gym has their own COVID-19 plan, so contact your facility to see how they're implementing it and the conditions of their reopening before you go.  No cinemas yet  but in some places, they're not far off.  The national framework says indoor movie theatres can open for up to 20 people in step two and up to 100 people in step three. Queensland is adopting this part of the plan for stage two of their roadmap, which is expected to begin on June 12, as has South Australia, where cinemas and theatres are to reopen on June 8. Cinemas are set to reopen in the Northern Territory on June 5, and Western Australia has also flagged reopening cinemas with gathering limits as part of their third phase of easing restrictions, which we should hear more about in the next few weeks. There's not a lot of detail available at the moment about what distances people would have to sit apart when cinemas do reopen. Cinemas and theatres in New South Wales are still closed for now, as they are in the ACT, Tasmania and Victoria (but Tasmania has flagged reopening cinemas to up to 20 people from June 15). For now, stick to Netflix (and iView!).  In most states and territories, you can  but the process might be a little different to what we're used to. Up to 20 patrons can sit in cafes and restaurants in Western Australia, but Queensland, Tasmania, the ACT and New South Wales venues are limited to 10 customers at a time for now. Outdoor dining in small groups has resumed in South Australia, as long as everyone is appropriately distanced. Table service is still not allowed in Victoria, but you can get takeaway. Restaurants, cafes, food courts and sports or RSL clubs are open again in the Northern Territory, but as with gyms, they have a two-hour time limit. Some restaurants and cafes require people to have downloaded the COVIDSafe app or to provide their contact details before they can dine at the venue for contact tracing purposes, and because of customer limits, pre-bookings are recommended. Sorry party animals  nightclubs aren't at the top of the list to reopen first in most places. The NT is ready to party though, they're reopening nightclubs, concert halls, dance halls and bars on June 5. Queensland has listed nightclubs as one of the venues that can have up to 100 people from July 10, but that's subject to further planning. Nightclubs have also been listed as a "future step for consideration" in South Australia, but there's no date on that for now. The national framework recommends nightclubs don't open until the third stage of the three-step plan  but when they do, they can have up to 100 people. It also recommends that places like brothels and strip clubs stay closed until further notice. Not in Victoria, there's still a ban on camping in national parks there. Camping in a state park or campground is still prohibited in Tasmania too, but is flagged in their second stage of easing restrictions that starts on June 15, and campgrounds in the ACT are also closed. Campgrounds and caravan parks remain closed in NSW, unless you work or permanently live there.  Queenslanders are only allowed to go on day trips at the moment, but from June 12 camping in national and state parks will be back on, and people can travel up to 250km from home to do it. But in South Australia, regional travel is allowed again and campgrounds and caravan parks are allowed to reopen, again with all the necessary social distancing.  Camping is also permitted in Western Australia in accordance with travel restrictions  there are still some intrastate borders in place in WA, and campers must observe the 10-person gathering limit. Similarly in the Northern Territory, you can camp but you can't enter restricted biosecurity zones, so it's best to check what parks are open and the activities you can do there before you go. Organised training is allowed for sports teams in the Northern Territory, and playing team sports is expected to be allowed from June 5. In Western Australia you can play non-contact sport with up to 20 people (some contact sport is expected return in their next phase).  Right now in Queensland up to 10 people can play non-contact sport outdoors, but from June 12, up to 20 people can gather for "non-contact indoor and outdoor community sport".  Outdoor sports training is allowed in South Australia for up to 10 people, and competitive sport is flagged to resume from June 8, including indoor sport.  The ACT is allowing up to 10 people to participate in social sport, as long as it's non-contact and outdoors, and up to 10 people can do non-contact training in Tasmania too. In Victoria, sport can resume if it's outside, non-competitive, everyone stays at least 1.5 metres apart and there's no more than ten people in a group  so if you can't modify your sport so there's no contact, it's not allowed. New South Wales also says people must stay 1.5 metres apart outdoors, and no more than 10 people can gather.  Depends how long your list of loved ones is. Restrictions limiting attendance at weddings and funerals have been particularly tough, but these are slowly starting to relax in most states and territories.  The Northern Territory doesn't specify a limit on outdoor weddings, and in Queensland the current 10-person limit is set to increase to 20 from June 12 and up to 100 from July 10. Western Australian weddings can have up to 20 people inside or 30 people outside. Ten guests can also attend a wedding in New South Wales right now, not including the couple, celebrant and photographer. Victoria has a similar rule  10 guests plus the couple and celebrant  same in Tasmania. The ACT also has a 10-person rule for weddings  there, it includes the couple, but doesn't include the celebrant and photographer. South Australia also includes the couple in their 10-person limit, but not a celebrant or "necessary staff".  There's various social distancing and hygiene conditions to holding weddings no matter where you are, so check with your venue first. If you have guests who are interstate, don't forget some states and territories still have strict border restrictions in place. Guests may be forced to quarantine after crossing the border, or if they don't have the appropriate exemptions they may not be allowed to cross at all.  Or basketball practice, or swimming lessons, or orchestra It all depends where they do their extracurricular activities, and how many people are in the group. In Queensland, for example, from June 12, up to 20 people will be allowed at pools, community sports clubs, theatres, auditoriums, health clubs and yoga studios. The Northern Territory has already opened studios again for dance classes and organised training for sports teams is back on too. Outdoor sports training can go ahead in South Australia in small groups, and community halls and clubrooms can open, but they have to keep any indoor sporting facilities closed. But in New South Wales dance halls are still closed, as are all indoor recreation facilities and indoor public pools. The ACT allows small groups to play and train for social sport and for swimming lessons to take place, but all indoor and outdoor gatherings can have a maximum of 10 people including children. In Victoria, small group lessons at places like community centres "cannot resume at this time" and contact sport is off the table  but from Monday, new protocols will allow for some gathering-limited, socially distanced AFL and netball training to resume. Tasmania says any indoor venue used for sport and recreation can't open or operate, including those used for dance, cheer and gymnastics, but non-contact sports training is allowed in groups of 10. In Western Australia up to 20 people can partake in fitness and non-contact sports, swim in public pools or gather at community facilities. Overseas travel still isn't on the cards to be resuming anytime soon. We've heard estimates about overseas travel not returning before 2021, and even that air travel might not fully go back to normal until 2023. But for now, all overseas travel is currently banned and exceptions to the rule are few and far between. There's a chance we could be able to visit New Zealand before international borders completely reopen, but there's no guarantees on that right now.  That dream overseas holiday will have to wait a little while longer. Every state and territory is rolling back their restrictions differently. Within that, each business is coming up with their own plans to meet requirements based on their particular location, facilities, staff and style of operation. National Cabinet is reviewing the progress of easing restrictions regularly, as are state and territory governments, so there is a chance that restrictions could remain in place or even be brought back if safety is at risk. If you're not sure about something, check your state or territory government's website or contact the business directly to ask how they're doing things. 
US President Donald Trump has parted ways with acting White House chief of staff Mick Mulvaney and replaced him with conservative congressman and close ally Mark Meadows. Mr Meadows takes over as the White House deals with the unfolding coronavirus crisis and as Mr Trump prepares for a re-election contest in November. He becomes the fourth chief of staff in Mr Trump's three years in office, tasked with attempting to bring order to a chaotic presidency. Mr Meadows is a member of the US House of Representatives from North Carolina and was a combative defender of the President during the impeachment saga, so much so that Mr Trump singled him out for praise after the Republican-led Senate acquitted the President. "He's a tremendously talented man, not just as a politician. As a human being, he's incredible," Mr Trump said at the time. Mr Trump named Mr Mulvaney to be his special US envoy to Northern Ireland amid preparations to welcome Irish Prime Minister Leo Varadkar to Washington for St Patrick's Day ceremonies later this month. A former senior administration official said the change had been a long time in the works and was a "done deal" some time ago. Mr Trump announced the move just after arriving at his Mar-a-Lago Club in Palm Beach, Florida, where he is spending the weekend. Mr Trump had long groused about Mr Mulvaney, who angered the President last year by saying at a White House news conference that Mr Trump had sought to persuade Ukraine to investigate Democratic rival Joe Biden by withholding US aid to Ukraine. What Mr Mulvaney said ran counter to Mr Trump's argument  that there was no "quid pro quo" with Ukraine. Mr Mulvaney quickly walked back the statement, but the damage was done. Mr Mulvaney, a conservative former South Carolina politician, did last more than a year as acting chief of staff after replacing retired General John Kelly, who had succeeded Reince Priebus in the job. He was named acting chief of staff in December 2018 and Mr Trump never made the appointment permanent. A source familiar with the situation said both Mr Mulvaney and Mr Meadows flew aboard Air Force One with Mr Trump to North Carolina on Monday and there was little warmth between the two men. There's no shame in being confused by the system. Plenty of Americans are, too. Mr Trump did not speak to Mr Mulvaney, the source said. Mr Meadows announced in December he would not run for re-election this year. "This was the most orchestrated personnel change so far. Since the Northern Ireland deal was announced at the same time, this was clearly a mutual decision," Sean Spicer, Mr Trump's former White House press secretary, said. Mr Spicer said Mr Meadows had a clear understanding of Mr Trump's style and agenda. ABC/Reuters 
Former Married at First Sight contestant and Instagram influencer Amanda Micallef has spread COVID-19 misinformation online, but experts say this kind of behaviour and susceptibility to conspiracy theories give us an insight into what can happen to human thinking "under crisis conditions". Recently, she shared a video of another former reality TV contestant speculating that the coronavirus was a ruse to get rid of physical money and added her own caption. "I wholeheartedly believe that the Corona Virus [sic] is the beginning of world control," she wrote. A few weeks ago, fed up with being locked down, Ms Micallef visited an anti-5G Facebook group and advocated for an anti-lockdown protest. The protest never happened, after Victoria Police visited her and warned her against organising the event. But despite the warning from authorities, Ms Micallef remains extremely sceptical of coronavirus lockdowns. "Health precautions my arse, I don't believe in it, I never have and I don't think I ever will," she said. Several social media figures in Australia have gone from posting recipes and workouts to posting wild claims about coronavirus, including chef Pete Evans who was fined $25,000 by Therapeutic Goods Administration last month over misleading claims relating to a light machine called a BioCharger. Ms Micallef said the initial urge to encourage people to ignore lockdown restrictions came from a place of frustration. "Being locked down, having my business and my income heavily impacted and then having more time on my hands to go and research the rabbit holes a little bit further," she said. "What people need to understand is regardless of me being a public figure or not, I too am a human being [and] am heavily impacted financially by this whole lockdown." University of Melbourne social anthropologist James Rose said people were more likely to take up conspiracy theories during stressful conditions, such as those presenting themselves in the pandemic. "What happens under crisis conditions is that people who would otherwise have healthy patterns of thinking, begin to find themselves drawn towards conspiratorial patterns of thinking," he said. "It's because their existing idea systems have begun to break down under pressure and are no longer sufficient to explain what's going on around them. "To explain why they've lost their job, why they're experiencing stress and why daily life has become so unpredictable." Dr Rose said social media  and the power it gives to people to broadcast their views  plays a part in disseminating misinformation. "The only requirement for fringe ideas to become popular is the number of followers that a proponent of that idea has," he said. "In the case of this conspiracy theory linking 5G communications to coronavirus, what we see is at least in relation to the Melbourne protests, the organiser was a contestant on a TV cooking show. "As a consequence of that, they had a large number of followers, so when this person slipped into a conspiratorial way of thinking, all of their followers were exposed to it." Dr Rose is referencing former cooking show contestant Fanos Panayides, who was arrested at last week's anti-lockdown protests. This week Mr Panayides has encouraged Australians tosmash their TVsin defiance of the mainstream media. Around the country, some people have reported that friends they would not expect to believe conspiracy theories, have started to believe them. Lee*, who wished to remain anonymous, said she had seen an increase in friends posting conspiracy theory-related content online since the lockdowns began. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "Definitely people I would not normally see posting things about conspiracy theories," she said. "That's what's surprised me the most  especially conspiracy theories around medical things." When she posted an article refuting some of the claims being made by her friends she was inundated by friends chastising her. "I had a lot of people commenting, a lot of friends commenting back to me, telling me I needed to wake up and do my research and telling me that they'd gone deep and they'd found information about it," she said. Dr Rose said the rise of views that were once considered fringe could be viewed as maladaptive coping strategies to rising incidences of poor mental health. "There is always some degree of conspiratorial thinking in a national population, normally it only affects a small number of people, who may have other underlying mental health conditions or they may be subject to other protracted or acute stressors because of personal circumstances," he said. "That's because their existing idea systems have begun to break down under pressure, they're no longer sufficient to explain what's going on around them." *name has been changed to protect their identity. 
Exports from four major beef facilities have been suspended, barley has been threatened with tariffs of 80 per cent and wine producers are worried they will not be able to sell their top drops. China's apparent displeasure at Prime Minister Scott Morrison's calls for an inquiry into the origin of COVID-19 is ramping up and it's feared many more industries could be at risk, adding to the pressure from the coronavirus economic slowdown. Here is a rundown of what's happening in China-Australia trade relations. China is by far Australia's biggest export market, taking about 30 per cent of Australia's exports by value. According to recent Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade figures, China takes $79.5 billion worth of Australian iron ore, $13.8 billion worth of coal and $16 billion in natural gas exports. In 2017-18 Australia exported $123.3 billion in goods and services to China, equal to about 6.7 per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The Chinese steel mills are engineered to take particular blends of ore that Australia supplies making it unlikely China would shift away to other suppliers, but the flow of Chinese students and tourists to our shores is under threat, as are exports of primary produce and consumer goods. There are over 12,000 Australian exporters selling goods to China either directly or via Hong Kong and over 3,000 Australian businesses based there. Australia's top trading partners: China also imports $2.67 billion in Australian beef, just slightly more than Japan. In fact, Japan does pip China for the slice of our resources in the coal and natural gas sectors as well, but again, not by a huge margin. Coal is the biggest where Japan's $17.05 billion of Australian coal imports is $3 billion more than China's. But both countries are way ahead of the next market, India, at just $10.61 billion. Australia's top goods exports: Biggest trading partners by top export: Iron ore Coal Natural gas Gold Beef Any sanctions or tariff hikes on Australian products will likely hit our grain, wine, dairy and seafood sectors which rely heavily on China as well. Chinese authorities have so far ignored attempts by the Morrison Government to reach out and discuss trade tensions. Trade Minister Simon Birmingham confirmed his Chinese counterpart Zhong Shan had not responded to his requests for a meeting. Prime Minister Scott Morrison described the current situation as "obviously a difficult time". He also said Australia "will always do the right thing when it comes to respecting other countries' laws". "We always respect the sovereignty of other nations and we simply expect the same in return and I think thats a pretty fair deal," he said. Although Australia would suffer some pretty severe economic fallout if China pulled the plug, UNSW Business School economics fellow and lecturer Tim Harcourt reckons our strong relationship with other Asian countries will see us through. "We're not alone. Most countries have been engaging heavily with China because it's the story of the Asian century, over 10 per cent growth [per annum] over 20 years, why wouldn't you?" Mr Harcourt said. "The difficulty with China you get a mix of geopolitics with commercial decisions. "With barley, Australia provides a fifth of China's barley  Any dispute around that has probably been around for about 18 months and China has chosen the corona spat to go in hard. "This talk of barley and beef, it's really just going to hurt China. "China has got great issues with energy security and food security. China would be aware Australia can shift over to Japan and South Korea pretty quickly. "China has got a billion people that need energy, food, quality education for their children." It might seem like the PM's enthusiasm for an inquiry into the origin of coronavirus  widely believed to be in the Chinese city of Wuhan  has prompted this retaliation, but this has all happened before. In any case, Mr Morrison is not giving up, saying Australia would always "stand our ground when it comes to the things we believe in" and "reach out to the rest of the world and seek to deal with it fairly, honestly and openly". UNSW Law's China International Business and Economic Law Centre co-director Professor Heng Wang said countries like Korea, Japan, Norway and Canada have all copped some kind of animosity from China. And France has been on the receiving end, too, of late. "It's not uncommon and the solution almost always depends on time and the relationship between the countries, and in most cases, it's hard to address in a short time," he said. "A more constructive way is to use the RCEP  Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership  the only one China is involved in. It's a regional free trade agreement among 16 countries that will deliver substantial new trade and investment opportunities for Australia in the Indo-Pacific region. "[These sorts of trade stoushes are] increasingly common if you don't have a trade-based agreement." China's Ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingyer described Mr Morrison's global coronavirus inquiry as "dangerous" and undermining of the global fight against the pandemic. He warned Chinese people might have second thoughts about trips to Australia and parents might not want to send their children to a hostile country. After banning imports from four Australian abattoirs, Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said China Customs detected repeated violations of inspection and quarantine requirements agreed by Chinese and Australian authorities. "To safeguard Chinese consumers' health and safety, China has decided to suspend effectively immediately, processing four Australian companies' import declarations for meat products," he said. "The relevant Australian department has been informed of this decision. "The Chinese side has asked the Australian side to conduct a thorough investigation to find the cause and address the issue. You may get more specifics from the competent Chinese authorities." All this sparks the question of why we are so concerned about one country refusing our produce. Mr Harcourt said there is a bit more work to do in diversification of our export markets, but it's not all doom and gloom, and we haven't put all our beef and barley into one paddock. "We have developed reasonable alternative markets  we have reasonable trade with South Korea, we're best of mates with Japan," he said. "For Australia it's been the engagement with Asia, not just China  the power of proximity, not the tyranny of distance. "I think there's a bit of diplomacy to do and a bit of diversification. [Trade Minister] Simon Birmingham is a level-headed smart guy and he will work through the usual channels commercially. "The beef industry will start again. There's some technical issues they'll get over. The beef producers have been quite measured. The average Chinese consumer loves Aussie beef, so do the Japanese and the Koreans. It's a quality product. "And, when you think about the nuts and blots of this, I would have thought the beneficiaries of a call for an inquiry into how a pandemic started would be the Chinese people, given how many people were harmed in Wuhan." 
The coronavirus has revived a hairstyle in East Africa, one with braided spikes that echo the virus' distinctive shape. The style's growing popularity is in part due to economic hardships linked to virus restrictions. It is cheap, mothers say, and helps with the goal of spreading awareness that the coronavirus is real. The hairstyle had gone out of fashion in recent years, as imported real and synthetic hair from India, China and Brazil began to flood the market and demand by local women increased. Pictures of the flowing or braided imported styles are tacked up in beauty salons across much of Africa. But now, in a makeshift salon beside a busy road in Kibera  a slum in the heart of the Kenyan capital Nairobi  24-year-old hairdresser Sharon Refa braids young girls' hair into the antennae-like spikes that people call the "coronavirus hairstyle". Girls shift in the plastic chairs as she tugs at their scalps. "Some grown-ups don't believe that the coronavirus is real, but then most young children appear keen to sanitise their hands and wear masks," Ms Refa said. "So many adults do not do this, and that is why we came up with the corona hairstyle." Kenya's number of confirmed virus cases was nearing 700 as of Monday. With the widespread shortage of testing materials, however, the real number of cases could be higher. Health officials are especially worried about the possible spread of the virus in crowded slums. Mothers like Margaret Andeya, who is struggling to make ends meet, said the coronavirus hairstyle suits her daughters' styling needs and her pocket. Virus-related restrictions have stifled the daily work for millions of people with little or no savings. "This hairstyle is much more affordable for people like me who cannot afford to pay for the more expensive hairstyles out there and yet we want our kids to look stylish," Ms Andeya said. It costs 50 shillings, or about 70 cents, to get the braids, while the average hairdo costs between $4.30 and $7.25. That's money most people in Kibera cannot afford at the moment. The technique used in braiding the coronavirus hairstyle is threading, which uses yarn instead of synthetic hair braids. This is the secret to making it affordable, residents said. "COVID-19 has destroyed the economy, taken our jobs from us, and now money is scarce," 26-year-old Mariam Rashid said. "I therefore decided to have my child's hair done up like this at an affordable 50 shillings, and she looks good. "The hairstyle also helps in communicating with the public about the virus." ABC/AP 
People love creating words  in times of crisis it's a "sick" (in the good sense) way of pulling through. From childhood, our "linguistic life has been one willingly given over to language play" (in the words of David Crystal). In fact, scientists have recently found learning new words can stimulate exactly those same pleasure circuits in our brain as sex, gambling, drugs and eating (the pleasure-associated region called the ventral striatum). We're leximaniacs at heart and, while the behaviour can occasionally seem dark, we can learn a thing or two by reflecting on those playful coinages that get us through "dicky" times. In the past, hard times birthed playful rhymes. The 1930s Depression gave us playful reduplications based on Australian landmarks and towns  "ain't no work in Bourke"; "everything's wrong at Wollongong"; "things are crook at Tallarook". Wherever we're facing the possibility of being "dicky" or "Tom [and] Dick" (rhyming slang for "sick"), we take comfort in language play.  It's one thing to feel "crook", but it's another thing again to feel as "crook as Rookwood" (a cemetery in Sydney) or to have a "wog" (synonymous with "bug", likely from "pollywog", and unrelated to the Italian/Greek "wog"). Remedies may be found in language's abilities to translate sores into plasters, to paraphrase William Gouge's 1631 sermon on the plague. New slang enables us to face our fears head-on  just as when the Parisians began calling a late-18th century influenza "la grippe" to reflect the "seizing" effect it had on people. The word was subsequently taken up in British and American English. In these times of COVID-19, there are the usual suspects: shortenings like "sanny" (hand sanitiser) and "iso" (isolation), abbreviations like BCV (before corona virus) and WFH (working from home), also compounds "corona moaner" (the whingers) and "zoombombing" (the intrusion into a video conference). Plenty of nouns have been "verbed" too  the toilet paper/pasta/tinned tomatoes have been "magpied". Even rhyming slang has made a bit of a comeback with Miley Cyrus lending her name to the virus (already end-clipped to "the Miley"). Some combine more than one process  "the isodesk" (or is that "the isobar") is where many of us are currently spending our days. What is interesting about COVID-lingo is the large number of creations that are blended expressions formed by combining two existing words.  The new portmanteau then incorporates meaningful characteristics from both. Newly spawned "coronials" (corona + millennials) has the predicted baby boom in late 2020 already covered. "Blursday" has been around since at least 2007 but originally described the day spent hung over  it's now been pressed into service because no-one knows what day of the week it is anymore. The official disease name itself, "COVID", is somewhere between a blend and an acronym because it takes in vowels to make the abbreviation pronounceable (CO from corona, VI from virus and D from disease). True, we've been doing this sort of thing for centuries  "flush" (flash + gush) dates from the 1500s. But it's never been a terribly significant method of coinage.  John Algeo's study of neologisms over a 50-year period (194191) showed blends counting for only 5 per cent of the new words.  Tony Thorne's impressive collection of more than 100 COVID-related terms has around 34 per cent blends, and the figure increases to more than 40 per cent if we consider only slang. Not only have blends become much more common, the nature of the mixing process has changed too. Rather than combining splinters of words, as in "coronials", most of these corona-inspired mixes combine full words merged with parts of others. The "quarantini" keeps the word "quarantine" intact and follows it with just a hint of "martini" (and for that extra boost to the immune system you can rim the glass with vitamin C powder). Many of these have bubbled up over the past few weeks  "lexit" or "covexit" (the strategies around exiting lockdown and economic hardship), "coronacation" (working from home) and so on. Humour emerges as a prevailing feature of these blends, even more so when the overlap is total.  Words like 'iso' and 'quazzie' could be helping Australians cope with coronavirus. In "covidiot" (the one who ignores public health advice and probably hoards toilet paper), both "covid" and "idiot" remain intact. There's been a flourishing of these types of blend  "covideo party", "coronapocalypse", "covidivorce" to name just a few. Clearly, there is a fair bit of dark comedy in the jokes and memes that abound on the internet, and in many of these coinages too  compounds like "coronacoma" (for the period of shutdown, or that deliciously long quarantine sleep) and "boomer remover" (used by younger generations for the devastation of the baby boomer demographic). Callous, heartless, yes. But humour is often used as a means of coming to terms with the less happy aspects of our existence. People use the levity as a way of disarming anxiety and discomfort by downgrading what it is they cannot cope with. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Certainly, gallows humour has always featured large in hospital slang (diagnoses like GOK "God only knows" and PFO "pissed and fell over"). For those who have to deal with dying and death every day, it is perhaps the only way to stay sane. COVID challenges us all to confront the biological limits of our own bodies  and these days humour provides the much-needed societal safety valve. So what will come of these creations? The vast majority will fall victim to "verbicide", as slang expressions always do. Kate Burridge is Professor of linguistics at Monash University and Howard Manns is a lecturer in linguistics at Monash University. The pair wrote this piece for The Conversation, where it was originally published. 
To survive in the unpredictable world of stabbings, shootings, road accidents and drug and alcohol violence, paramedics develop a nose for danger. Our instinct and priority is to shield ourselves from it first. Running into a burning building might seem heroic, but you can't help a soul when you're dead. When I picked up my first suspected case of COVID-19 four weeks ago, I felt like the canary in the coalmine. Our patient was in his late 60s, a former sailor with a missing leg. We knew it was serious. Sailors don't often call ambulances  especially Moby Dick kind of sailors  unless they're really dying. What's a mere flu after wrestling whales? After hearing his coughing and spluttering from the door, we returned to the ambulance and put on our personal protective equipment (PPE). It felt like a pivotal moment  one I wasn't too comfortable with. It made me think of my escape plan. Back in 2003, I'd done a training course for chemical, biological and radioactive emergencies. Learning about the effects of nerve agents on the human body was alarming. Stuck in my head to this day is the mnemonic SLUDGE: salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, gastric emptying, emesis  basically, leaking from every orifice. It's no wonder my classmates and I had second thoughts. We decided to keep Aloha shirts, emblazoned with palm trees and sunsets, in our ambulances just in case an incident like this actually happened. Then, we could put them on and walk away from the ambulance, disappear into the crowd  vanish for our own survival. It's wasn't cowardly, just sensible. Remember DR ABC from your first aid course? Danger  remove the danger, or yourself from danger. The night we picked up the sailor, I thought of my Aloha shirt, and wondered if this was the moment to put it on. For a second the idea made me smile, but of course it was a fantasy. Running away was never a serious option.  Radio National Fictions is the ABC's place for creative audio fiction. We deal in the hilarious, the gritty and sometimes the dystopian. Think of it as movies for your ears. Instead I would do what most paramedics were doing: curse quietly, protect myself as best I could, then go join the battle. A month on, emergencies like car accidents and sporting injuries are down, because people are cocooned in isolation. We respond along empty highways reclaimed by insects. When we arrive at a house with a suspected COVID-19 case, we don our masks and gloves, goggles and gowns. It takes time. The curtains of neighbouring houses twitch. Fearful eyes stare down. But we can't rush our work. There's a system we follow: the order of PPE application and removal, how we dispose of face-shields and garments, the meticulous cleaning of ourselves and our vehicles. But no matter the care we take or how disciplined we are with wiping down, some people out there see us as lepers.  At the height of the coronavirus outbreak, we followed the city's paramedics into the homes of the sick and dying. No wonder our usual workload of anxious people has dropped. To many we are now the ones they fear the most, thinking we carry the virus. They give us the widest berth in the mall and cross the street to avoid us. Last week, a customer at a supermarket called a paramedic friend of mine a "spreader". When my work partner says she's hungry and wants to stop by Woollies in the ambulance I offer to go in for her. "I have my shirt," I tell her. "My Aloha shirt." But she's not convinced. "Who wears Hawaiian shirts over blue uniform trousers with reflective stripes?" she replies, shaking her head. "No point going undercover unless you do it right." My initial anxieties have begun to settle. The Australian coronavirus disaster hasn't materialised, at least not so far. I heard a man outside my coffee shop call it a "fizzer". The sailor we picked up on our first night tested negative, as have most of those I've treated. So far only one paramedic in the country has been infected. We've played our cards right and we're winning the game  though it won't take much for things to go south if we get cocky about it. After work I take my uniform off at the ambulance station and leave my boots in my locker. My wife doesn't like me hugging the children or touching anything at all without a shower. Even then, when I try and kiss her on the lips she turns her head and gives me her cheek. "Sorry! Corona!" she says, cheerfully as she can. It could just be an excuse to avoid my kisses, but if it's fear, I understand. Just as I'm protecting myself from patients, she's protecting herself from me. D for danger, I know.  Maybe it will end up being the lack of kisses, rather than coronavirus, that compels me to put on my Aloha shirt and walk into the sunset. Benjamin Gilmour is a paramedic and author. His most recent book is The Gap. Get more stories that go beyond the news cycle with our weekly newsletter. 
While the country faces its most serious health crisis in living memory, 62-year-old Steve Johnstone uses a thin piece of rope around a dusty ute to quarantine himself. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Each morning he washes in the ocean, sits down with a first aid kit and checks his temperature to reassure himself he does not have coronavirus.  "We have nowhere else to go," Mr Johnstone said.  The Far North Queensland man is one of about 15 people living in cars and tents at a campsite between Ellis Beach and the Captain Cook Highway, 30 kilometres north of Cairns. With most other campgrounds and caravan parks in the region closed due to COVID-19, the spot has become a temporary haven for pensioners, homeless people and backpackers during the pandemic.  Dead branches and tree vines have been used to section off sites so the occupants can comply with social distancing rules, in the hope they will not be forced to move on.  "I don't have a home to quarantine so I've made this my home until I can find accommodation," Mr Johnstone said.  Unemployed and living off a disability pension, Mr Johnstone said he could not afford accommodation options offered to him by the Queensland Housing Department and other homeless support services in the area.  "The only other place I can probably go to is a deserted house and squat in it, which I don't want to do.  With no toilets or showers at the campsite he was also concerned about the health and safety of occupants but said this was his lifestyle until the pandemic passed. "I'm pretty sure they can open up some caravan parks or the Cairns Showgrounds for people like us. "It's not really possible for us to quarantine if people are coming and going.  "If you get corona your cards are definitely up, especially when you're my age." But others at the site said they had chosen to settle there and believed it was the safest option during the pandemic.  German backpacker Jannik Zintarra has been camping at the site for two weeks.  "At the beginning we were in a hostel, but there were way too many people for us so we decided to go to a camp ground.  "So many [other campgrounds] are closed so we ended up here.  "We could do Airbnb but that's very expensive and we're trying to save money because we just can't find a job at the moment."  Mr Zintarra said they were trying to help each other out, making trips to the nearest town to buy food and essential items for elderly campers.  Members of the Ellis Beach and Buchans Point community have raised concerns about the campground with Queensland Police Service (QPS) and the Transport Department.   A police spokesperson said officers were aware of the situation, but some of the campers had nowhere else to go.  "We won't be taking any action against them especially in the current climate," the spokesperson said.  "They're doing really a pretty good job with what they've got.  "Whilst they're there and doing the right thing, at least we know they're not moving around and spreading the virus."  The Cairns Regional Council said it had received 29 complaints relating to illegal camping in the past three weeks and 11 resulted in move-on requests.  "Council is taking an educational and flexible approach to those people, such as grey nomads and travelling backpackers, who may have found themselves without a place to stay as a result of coronavirus restrictions," a spokesman said.  The Queensland Transport Department said it was working closely with the QPS and Cairns Regional Council to determine the best approach to managing camping in roadside areas. A spokesperson said the situation at Ellis Beach would be monitored and enforcement action would be carried out if necessary.  On March 26, the Queensland Government announced $24.7 million to help specialist homelessness services provide immediate housing support to vulnerable residents during the COVID-19 crisis, but the amount distributed in Far North Queensland was unclear.   The ABC has contacted homelessness services including Mission Australia and Anglicare but has not received a response.  
Health workers in Iran are warning people to not fall for coronavirus hoaxes, after 700 people died from alcohol poisoning amid claims drinking bootleg liquor can keep the virus at bay. A report released by the Iranian Government earlier this month showed alcohol poisoning over a two-month period was 10 times the number of cases during the whole of 2019, likely spurred by the COVID-19 epidemic. The national coroner's authority said alcohol poisoning killed 728 Iranians between February 20 and April 7. Last year there were only 66 deaths from alcohol poisoning, according to the report. "People think that alcohol causes immunity to corona, while drinking alcohol does not eliminate corona in the body," a medical expert recently told the Government-aligned Tasnim News Agency.  "This misconception has caused even children to drink alcohol  which can lead to death and blindness." Along with Turkey, Iran is facing one of the worst coronavirus outbreaks in the Middle East with 5,806 deaths and more than 91,000 confirmed cases. Iranian health ministry spokesman Kianoush Jahanpour said 525 people had died from swallowing toxic methanol alcohol since February 20, according to local state TV. He said a total of 5,011 people had been poisoned from methanol alcohol, adding that about 90 people had lost their eyesight or were suffering eye damage from the alcohol poisoning. Fake remedies have spread across social media in Iran, where people remain deeply suspicious of the Government after it downplayed the crisis before it overwhelmed the country. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. The Iranian Government mandates that manufacturers of toxic methanol add an artificial colour to their products so the public can tell it apart from ethanol, the kind of alcohol that can be used in cleaning wounds. Ethanol is also the kind of alcohol found in alcoholic beverages, though its production is illegal in Iran, where consumption of alcohol is prohibited under strict Islamic law. Minority Christians, Jews and Zoroastrians may drink alcoholic drinks in private, however, and there is a bootleg industry. Some bootleggers in Iran use methanol, adding a splash of bleach to mask the added colour before selling it as drinkable. Sometimes it is mixed with consumable alcohol to stretch supply, other times it comes as methanol, falsely advertised as drinkable. Methanol also can contaminate traditionally fermented alcohol. Methanol poisoning causes delayed organ and brain damage and can cause symptoms like chest pain, hyperventilation, blindness and inducing a coma. "Other countries have only one problem, which is the new coronavirus pandemic. But we are fighting on two fronts here," said Dr Hossein Hassanian, an adviser to Iran's Health Ministry.  "We have to both cure the people with alcohol poisoning and also fight the coronavirus." In response to the coronavirus outbreak, Iran's Government announced it would allow an increase in the production of alcohol for medical purposes. The country currently has more than 40 alcohol-producing factories that have been allocated to pharmaceutical companies and the sanitising of items. Even before the outbreak, the Iranian economy was struggling under severe US sanctions, blocking the sale of its crude oil abroad and limiting medical supplies. On Thursday, US President Donald Trump came under fire for suggesting the possibility of injecting disinfectant to cure coronavirus, causing an international uproar with government agencies rushing to put out warnings against consuming disinfectants like bleach. ABC/AP 
On her country mail run Jocelyn Flint delivers letters, boxes of wine, flat pack queen-size beds, asthma puffers, and even biscuits for morning tea. With about 5,000 people in quarantine in Tasmania's North West, there's a strict stay-at-home order for everyone in the region and Ms Flint is a welcome sight as she does her rounds. "I've been getting quite a few thankyous the past couple of days," Ms Flint said. Cheryl Willie lives with her husband on the Redpa dairy farm run by her son, Rohan. They've got 300 Friesian cows on prime, lush green dairying country. She loves catching up with Ms Flint, especially at the moment. "We couldn't do without her  because she's the only person we're seeing in isolation," Ms Willie said. Ms Willie is one of about 300 farms and households on Ms Flint's postal route on the north-west tip of Tasmania. "It's always good to see the mail lady, as we call her," Mr Willie said. Even more so now that the north west of Tasmania is in lockdown due to a COVID-19 outbreak. "A lot of people rely on her pretty much," Mr Willie said. Ms Flint is delivering all kinds of things and often a bit extra. "I'm doing a lot more deliveries at the moment, people aren't leaving home and they're ringing me and I'm picking up stuff for them," she said. Nothing is too big or too small for this country postie, but sometimes it is a squeeze getting stuff into the back of her small four-wheel drive. Yesterday it was a flat pack queen-size bed, the other day a flat screen tv, some medication for cows, and an asthma puffer. Since the coronavirus outbreak, it is taking her longer to do the run  but it's not just because of the increase in parcels. "I'm always having a yack, got to catch up, and I'm full of news. I can tell them what's going on around the place. I know everything," Ms Flint said. It's pretty social and she gets plenty of laughs along the way. Farmers in this country put a bit of effort into the designs of their letterboxes. One farmer on the route built a letterbox in the shape of an army tank. Often this postie will go to extra lengths to deliver to her clients, dropping things off at the door rather than the roadside post box. Sometimes the requests are a bit cheeky, like the one for a packet of biscuits for a famer's morning tea. "When I got to the mailbox, there was an envelope in there and there were cow muck fingerprints all over it and a lot of five-cent coins," Ms Flint said. In her spare time, Ms Flint is a horsewoman. She's part of a posse of local stockmen and women who volunteer to move cattle from Robbins Island to mainland Tasmania. It's an 11-kilometre route that she knows well and it sees the cattle and drovers winding their way between pooling seawater and a rushing incoming tide. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "You never get over the scenery, it's beautiful. It's just so different every time," she said. A knee operation forced her out of the saddle recently and she missed the last muster. "I'll be on the horse soon," she said. In the meantime this stockwoman and country postie is playing a big part in keeping North West Tassie people happy in trying times. 
Despite restrictions on local businesses and COVID-19 travel restrictions, some Wheatbelt businesses are stronger than before because of local support. In Northam, about 100 kilometres east of Perth, many businesses did better during the strictest period of Western Australia's regional border closures, according to Northam Chamber of Commerce CEO, Esther Bliss. "There's been a lot of businesses in town that have done very well because people aren't going down the hill and have been able to buy local," she said. "Something we have been screaming at them [about] for years, the businesses have seen a great number of people who have never been in their stores before, coming in." Avon Valley Contractors is a stock feed, garden and bike shop that has been operating in Northam for four years. Owner Enrika Grogan said April was their best month of business ever. "April was up 22 per cent so that would be a massive profit margin for us  that is huge," she said. "Normally 6 to 7 per cent  that's kind of where you're tracking." The business diversified into a bike shop by chance last year and Ms Grogan said they had been so busy they had to employ another staff member in the midst of the pandemic. "We've kind of been continually adding to the business because when you're in a country town or community you kind of have to be ready to pivot very easily, you can't stay doing the same thing," she said. "Everyone in town is feeling that and anyone that maybe would have lost business to Perth has gained people who may have travelled down the hill." At Lucy's Cafe on the main street of Northam, owner Jess Joy said when COVID-19 restrictions were first introduced, they had to diversify their business by making ready-to-go meals. She said their loyal customer base meant they were able to survive. "Our customers have been amazing," Ms Joy said. "We might usually have someone get their own lunch but they've encouraged their workplace to get lunch and things like that, so the community has been awesome." Ms Bliss said the pandemic had been a learning curve for regional businesses. "You cannot just rely on things as they always had been, because we are in a time where this has never happened before," she said. "So the lesson learnt is to always continuously be improving your business and always looking at alternative revenue streams and not putting all your eggs in one basket." 
A pop-up medical centre in the Latrobe Valley has incorrectly charged several of its patients a medical fee for COVID-19 testing. According to the Department of Health and Human Services, testing for the virus is free at public health facilities, mobile testing centres or GP bulk-billing clinics. Pensioner Sandra Dick, from Churchill, received an invoice from the Mid Valley Walk-through testing facility in Morwell, which is operated by Dorevitch Pathology. She said she was billed $91.80 after she was tested for coronavirus. "I received the bill in the mail, and it shocked me a bit because I was under the impression that it was free," Ms Dick said. "When I got the account, I was sort of a bit stunned because the doctor who supposedly referred me and the pathologist  I'd never heard of either of them." Independent State MP for Morwell, Russell Northe, said a number of concerned patients contacted his office about the issue, claiming Dorevitch did not bother to address the matter. "People were supposed to be informed via text or other means that it was a mistake but unfortunately there has been a cohort of people that haven't received that message," he said. "It's just imperative that every single person that was tested at that Mid Valley clinic has subsequently been advised by the authorities that they're not required to pay that bill." A spokesman from Dorevitch said patients were wrongfully billed due to a technical system glitch and a round of text messages have been sent to the patients advising them to disregard the bill. He said patients who do not receive texts will be phoned or a letter will be posted to their address. 
South Australia's last remaining COVID-19 patient has left the Royal Adelaide Hospital, in what nurses say is a miracle recovery. Paul Faraguna, 68, the first COVID-19 patient to be admitted to intensive care and the last to walk out, was farewelled by staff from the infectious diseases ward with a standing ovation on Thursday afternoon. Mr Faraguna was admitted to hospital just over two months ago, after contracting the coronavirus aboard the Ruby Princess cruise ship. He was admitted to intensive care six days later, suffering organ failure and placed in an induced coma. "The doctors were unable to say what my future would be if I survived, even suggesting that I may have brain damage and be permanently disabled," he said in a statement. The Royal Adelaide Hospital's Nurse Unit Manager, Karen Shutz, said Mr Faraguna's journey was a rollercoaster for him and his family.  "We honestly didn't think he'd make it through, but to see him come out the other side is just the most amazing gift you can have out of this pandemic," Ms Shutz said. "He is one amazing, resilient gentleman, who I don't think I've ever seen him be down at all in the whole time he's been here with us. "It was just such a huge boost that somebody had made it out the other side who was really sick, so yeah, there were a few tears as he was walking out this afternoon." Mr Farugna is now headed for further treatment and rehabilitation at Modbury Hospital. "The only challenge left is to walk normally again, which should, I feel, happen in the near future due to my physiotherapy program," he said. SA Health hasn't recorded any new cases of coronavirus for two-weeks. The total number of COVID-19 cases detected in South Australia remains 439, but there are no longer any known active cases of the disease in South Australia. But SA Health continues to urge people to maintain social distancing and good hand, cough and sneeze hygiene practices. Health authorities also want anyone in SA with even only mild flu-like symptoms  or who have lost the sense of taste or smell  to get tested for COVID-19. 
Huddled together, tears flowing and words of love being whispered, a reunion between two sisters in a small New South Wales town marks the end of a nearly two-month battle to grant a dying wish. After five travel exemption applications, two weeks of self-isolation in Sydney and two negative results for COVID-19, it's been an arduous journey for Christine Archer to be at the side of her terminally ill sister, Gail Baker. On Wednesday afternoon, the retired New Zealand nurse finally made it to the NSW Mid North Coast village of Bowraville. "Words can't explain how I feel," Ms Archer said.  "I'm just so happy that I finally got to be here and be with her.  "The last two weeks have been the hardest or the longest two weeks of my life I think."  Ms Archer was granted a COVID-19 travel exemption on May 1 to fly from New Zealand to care for her younger sister, who has advanced ovarian cancer. The approval came after four rejections by the Department of Home Affairs.  For Ms Baker, the ordeal was "demoralising", as she faced the possibility of dying alone in hospital without her sister.  Ms Baker's terminal diagnosis had already forced her to give up her decades-long career as a midwife, and the rejections of her sister's application had left her disheartened. But, she said, the approval of the fifth application restored her hope her sister would be able to come to Australia to be with her.  "I didn't have much hope [Christine] would be let into the country, so it was a huge relief," Ms Baker said.  "At the time I honestly didn't think I would last a week or two. I was very ill." As she sat in her living room and reminisced with her older sister over a cuppa, surrounded by her only daughter, grandchildren and dogs, Ms Baker said it was exactly how she wanted to live out her final weeks and months.  "That is my dying wish, and it's why I couldn't wait to get out of the hospital, because I thought I was going to die in there," she said.  "I want to be here with my dogs and my sister and [daughter] Erica, who is a bit frightened of death. She hasn't had much to do with that and I don't want her to be frightened." Ms Baker's daughter, Erica Peterson, said it was a mixture of relief and happiness to see her mother and aunt reunited after what had been a difficult six weeks.  She said hoped that as the pandemic continued no-one else would have to endure a similar experience.  "If somebody is dying or if there is some exceptional circumstance, please let people's families be with them," she said.  "People need to be with their families at horrible times like these." 
Community sports clubs are working on plans to restart seasons after a coronavirus-induced pause, but for some clubs the starting whistle may never ring out again. Clubs and industry bodies are calling for additional support Time was called on community and grassroots sports in March as regulations were introduced to limit the impact of COVID-19. League, union, soccer, netball and hockey, among other team sports, have been on hold ever since. Bundaberg Hockey Association president Des Barritt said revenue was down significantly, with associations, clubs and sponsors fighting to remain viable. "Our revenue from the bar and canteen is what [usually] sort of helps prop us up in meeting our financial commitments for the year, because we've still got rates, insurance, our groundsmen  even though we're not playing we need to maintain the fields.  "We'll be lucky to even get half a season in, so our revenue is going to be well and truly down, because the players don't want to pay for a full season if they are only going to get half. "It's not just a matter of just opening up the gates and we go forward. We've got to implement our COVID safety plan, which is going to take a lot of work and a lot of extra money, as well with sanitising, disinfecting, cleaning." Clubs Queensland, the industry association for community clubs, has valued the annual economic contribution of clubs, including RSLs, at $2.2 billion. Acting CEO Dan Nipperess said the biggest concern stemming from coronavirus shutdowns was the ongoing overhead costs. "Clubs have seen between a 90 and a 95 per cent drop in incomes," he said. "You could be looking at 20 to 25 per cent of community clubs not being able to reopen. About half of the 850 clubs in Queensland are sports clubs." The Australian Sports Foundation has begun surveying clubs to gauge the impact of the pandemic. CEO Patrick Walker said initial responses had painted a worrying picture. "We've got clubs telling us they've lost 80 per cent of their sponsorship because the local pub, club or cafe has closed its doors  clubs that have received their membership regos, spent it, and are now faced with having to refund it, and they don't have the money," he said. "Some have told us they'd be out of business within three months without funding. "The big issue is, we think, when members do get back to competition and training, a lot of people won't be able to afford sport for them or their kids anymore, and there will be a big decline in participation." Heather McLaren, regional president of Marlin Coast Netball in Far North Queensland, said the financial situation for many clubs in the region was also perilous. "Many parents haven't paid their dues at the moment, which is understandable, and many who have paid will want at least a partial refund due to the season being at best truncated, at worst not happening at all," she said. "We're just holding the money and we'll have to refund it if the season doesn't go ahead." Ms McLaren said fees already paid had gone to the managing body in Brisbane and there was uncertainty about whether that money would ever be returned to clubs  further complicating the financial situation. "The fees that we pay to register our players go to the governing body  it covers insurance  and there will have to be some consultation with that state body, and whether we get that money back will be in the lap of the gods, I think," she said. Gladstone Rugby League chairman Richard Duff said the league would survive the pandemic, but not without challenges. "They're all going to survive  the Gladstone council has been proactive having meetings with all sporting groups, and the [Queensland Rugby League] are developing plans to help clubs out of this," he said. "It is going to cost more when we emerge from this, disinfecting the rooms, hand sanitiser, only so many people at games  all of us rely on people coming to junior and senior sport and buying food from the kiosk  so how we are going to generate revenue is going to be the question." Industry bodies have intensified their pleas for government assistance. Australian Sports Foundation CEO Patrick Walker said the body had also been rallying for independent support. "Traditional forms of fundraising have stopped. No sausage sizzles, no club events and dinners, can't do a Friday night meat raffle," he said. "They're being hit from every angle and many will go to the wall. "We do need governments, philanthropy and charities to look at how they can help this part of the community through this troublesome period." In Bundaberg, Des Barritt  who had been planning to host the under-15 men's state championship in September, before it was cancelled  said there was some optimism on the horizon. "Hockey Queensland is hoping to allocate those same championships to the same places again next year, so the areas can hang their hat on having a championship next year and we'll hopefully get some revenue out of that," he said. Queensland's Sports Minister Mick De Brenni has been contacted for comment. 
Photos of 27-year-old Pujiyoko show a young man in his prime, who loved to travel, loved adventure and loved life. When he left his impoverished parents in central Java, to work as a crew member on Royal Caribbean's Symphony of the Seas, Pujiyoko was fit, healthy and excited about a job that would take him around the world. "He loved working on that ship," his father, Isanto, said. "A friend told him about the job, and he told us he wanted to go, so I gave him my permission. "It's what he wanted to do. He was the breadwinner for the family." Pujiyoko worked in housekeeping on the cruise liner, which Royal Caribbean promotes as the largest passenger ship in the world by gross tonnage, and one that offers guests "unforgettable experiences for day and night". But while Pujiyoko's last days on board Symphony of the Seas were unforgettable, it was in the worst possible way. On March 23, roughly a week after the last passengers had disembarked in Miami, he fell ill with symptoms of the coronavirus. According to a wrongful death case filed in Miami's circuit court, he presented to the ship's medical facility every day for a week, with worsening symptoms. Fever and body aches developed into severe pneumonia. By March 28 he was put on oxygen. The following day, still on board, he was diagnosed with COVID-19. But it was only on the evening of March 30 that he was finally taken ashore on a lifeboat and then to hospital, where he was put on a ventilator. Less than two weeks later, he died with a "severe anoxic brain injury". Pujiyoko's parents are now suing Royal Caribbean, alleging their son wasn't tested for COVID-19 for a full six days and should have been taken to shore much earlier. "They didn't tend to him fast enough," his father said. "They didn't pay enough attention to him. "Had the company taken him to hospital sooner, he could have survived." His mother, Sukarni, sobbed as she looked at photos of her son on board the cruise ship, smiling alongside his crewmates in happier times. "His plan was to work so he could make us happy," she said. "He told me [he] would send me on the hajj [to Mecca] as a pilgrim, because we are so poor." Royal Caribbean refused to respond to the ABC's request for an interview, saying "we do not comment on pending litigation". The Indonesian family's US-based lawyer Michael Winkleman says not only did the company neglect Pujiyoko, but it did nothing to protect other crew members, even after passengers had disembarked and the fear of the coronavirus on cruise ships was already widespread. The lawsuit alleges that crew members were even "encouraged to attend parties, shows, events and activities that took place aboard the ship" in the two weeks after passengers had disembarked. They required crew to be in close proximity and crowded spaces, but without any protection against COVID-19. "The [US] Centers for Disease Control (CDC) shut down all cruising on March 13," Mr Winkleman said. "And yet even after that it was as though there was nothing going on for the crew members, nothing being done to protect them. No social distancing, no quarantine, no masks." Mr Winkleman says they even had a party on St Patrick's Day where there were probably "hundreds, if not even a thousand crew members". "Again, no masks, no nothing, no precautions taken to protect the crew," he said. The lawsuit states that at least one passenger on Symphony of the Seas had coronavirus symptoms on March 7, a week before passengers disembarked. All further voyages were cancelled once the CDC was notified of positive cases among passengers. But Royal Caribbean "failed to follow even the most basic safety precautions," such as quarantining crew members on its ships, providing them with masks, or requiring them to observe social distancing, the lawsuit says. Pujiyoko was one of at least five Indonesians to die from COVID-19 on cruise liners, and one of two who died on Royal Caribbean ships. A Balinese man, I Putu Sugiartha, died on one of Royal Caribbean's other ships, the Oasis of the Seas, on April 18, more than a month after he boarded the ship. The ABC has been told his family settled out of court with the shipping company. More than 100 other crew members on Oasis of the Seas tested positive for COVID-19 while on board, the lawsuit alleges. A Filipino crewman, Dexter Joyosa, also died. There are also concerns for those crew members still stranded on cruise ships. Reports have emerged of apparent suicides and protests by crew members who are still stuck on board, unable to leave. While cruise ship companies have been negotiating for weeks with governments to offload passengers around the world, tens of thousands of crew members remain on ships. "Mental health is a huge issue on those ships," Mr Winkleman said. "You have crew members now, going on plus two months they've been trapped on these ships, away from their families, the vast majority of them not being paid. "Half the time they're quarantined in a tiny little cabin, and these are not the passenger cabins, that are much more spacious, these are tiny little cabins." One crew member on the Regal Princess  a Ukrainian woman  threw herself overboard in the Netherlands on May 9. Rotterdam police have ruled the death a suicide. Another crew member  a Polish man  apparently threw himself off an upper deck of the Jewel of the Seas, another Royal Caribbean ship, in early May, although his body has not been found. Crew members on a separate Royal Caribbean ship, the Majesty of the Seas, last week staged a hunger strike begging to go home. A banner posted on board read: "How Many More Suicides are Needed?" Earlier this month, Manila Bay in the Philippines became the world's biggest "parking lot" for cruise ships, with thousands of crew still on board. More ships were expected to join. But shipping companies argue that flight bans and lockdowns have made it impossible to repatriate all their crew. In an April 17 note titled Crew Repatriation Weekly Update, Royal Caribbean wrote that the CDC had banned all flights for crew repatriation. The CDC, however, says it is allowing crew members on ships in US waters to disembark and return home if cruise lines "submit a signed attestation stating that they have complied with requirements to safely disembark their crew members". Royal Caribbean says repatriation plans are now underway. "So far, we have successfully repatriated over 16,000 crew members, and we are working with governments and health authorities around the world on our plans," the company told the BBC. 
State bans on coal seam gas development would be scrapped and the Federal Government would underwrite gas prices and massively subsidise costs and investment for gas companies, under confidential plans for a "gas-led manufacturing recovery" post-COVID-19. The draft plans, obtained by the ABC, call for the scrapping of "green and red tape" on gas development, including a relaxation of Australian standards for equipment used in gas infrastructure and a loosening of environmental regulations and approval processes. They are set out in an interim report from the manufacturing taskforce of the National COVID Coordination Commission (NCCC). The NCCC is a hand-picked team of business leaders and former bureaucrats set up by the Prime Minister's Office to shape the economic recovery from the virus and lockdown, and includes several members with strong links to the gas sector. The manufacturing taskforce includes business representatives as well as union leaders from that sector. Its draft report advocates "underwriting new [gas] supply with government balance sheets" to allow gas producers "to invest with confidence and new pipelines to be built to get the gas to markets". The taskforce says the Government should be "taking a non-operating equity position, minority share, or underwriting position" in gas projects and "provide support, such as low-cost capital, to existing small and mid-cap market participants". It also wants mechanisms to put a government-guaranteed floor under gas prices, so companies can borrow against that guaranteed price. And the NCCC wants massive government spending to underwrite a network of new pipelines linking gas projects in the north-west of Western Australia to the east coast. New gas ventures that meet state-based environmental standards would be exempt from the need to gain federal environmental approvals under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Act if the recommendations of the commission and taskforce are adopted. Concerns about the environment and the impact on agriculture and groundwater have led to the shelving of coal seam gas developments in NSW and Victoria. But the NCCC is urging governments to "lift the moratorium in NSW and the remaining moratoria in Victoria", "initiate a rapid 'red & green tape' reduction" and "establish a global best practice gas development regulatory framework in the Northern Territory  to unlock new supply for the east coast." The contents of the plan highlight potential conflicts of interest for businesspeople involved in the NCCC and its manufacturing taskforce. West Australian businessman Nev Power, who chairs the NCCC, is a director and shareholder of WA-based Strike Energy, which aspires to be "the lowest cost onshore gas producer in Australia" and would potentially benefit from government investment subsidies and the underwriting of gas pipelines. The NCCC report obtained by the ABC advocates "accelerated developments for highly prospective opportunities" including the Perth Basin, which is Strike Energy's main exploration area. The commission's special advisor on manufacturing renewal, former Dow Chemical global chairman and CEO Andrew Liveris, is deputy chairman of the world's biggest oil and gas consultancy and engineering firm, Worley, and is also a director of Saudi Aramco, the world's biggest oil and gas company, which has ambitions to invest in Australia. Facilitating foreign direct investment in the gas industry is one of the report's recommendations. A Senate committee which examined the taskforce last week was told that members of the NCCC were required to sign a conflict of interest declaration but, as a "special advisor" to the commission, Mr Liveris was not. The Federal Government's National COVID Coordination Commission has a lot of gas industry players involved, and it appears to be showing in its policy recommendations. Speaking at the committee hearings, the CEO of the NCCC, former Productivity Commission chairman Peter Harris, said the commission had established "what you might consider to the normal declaration process" for conflicts of interest at the start of each of its meetings. He said that as NCCC chairman, Nev Power had "taken it upon himself to advise commissioners that  should they encounter something which involves commercially sensitive information which could create a perception that they are being put in an advantageous position, they should draw that matter to his attention or, in his absence, to my attention." Mr Harris added that the commission would "construct an arrangement by which they can either continue their involvement in this or remove themselves from involvement  and another commissioner will take over." In a statement to the ABC from the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, on behalf of the NCCC, the commission reiterated that it follows "best-practice arrangements for managing the integrity of its advice". "That includes recusal from discussions where there may be a conflict of interest and written declarations to the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet recording their interests and those of their family members," the statement noted. "The commission has also put in place additional processes to manage potential conflicts of interest, such as commencing each meeting of the NCCC with a declaration of any relevant conflicts." When asked by The Business host Elysse Morgan in an interview earlier this month whether his involvement with Strike Energy presented any conflict of interest given his role at the commission, Mr Power said he supported all types of energy. He described Strike as "an emerging player in the gas market in Western Australia". When asked again about the potential for conflicts in a recent interview with the Financial Review, Mr Power said "we are very transparent about our interests" and the commission had "processes" to address that issue. "We are there to provide business advice and we are upfront about that." Mr Power said, ultimately, the government would make decisions, not the commission. In the vision of the taskforce, gas development goes hand-in-hand with development of energy-intensive manufacturing industries, including chemicals and "mineral tech". Renewables are not to blame for soaring electricity costs: gas is the main culprit, writes Ian Verrender. But the NCCC's emphasis on a "gas-led manufacturing recovery" and call for government subsidies and relaxing of environmental controls has drawn severe criticism from analysts and advocacy groups who support a shift away from fossil fuels to renewable energy. "It's a blueprint for the gas industry, it's not a manufacturing blueprint, it's pathetic," said Tim Buckley, director of energy research at the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis, who spent 30 years in senior roles in investment banking. "They say we need to correct the 'market failures' of our current energy supply to reduce electricity costs and 'break the investment logjam'. "As far as I am concerned, spending 80 billion dollars in east coast gas markets in the last eight years is an exact opposite of an investment logjam." Mr Buckley said there was a huge irony that the gas industry's massive, unprofitable investment in three giant gas export terminals off the coast of Queensland was responsible for a massive rise in gas prices for Australian industry. "The very industry that has created a massive inflationary pressure that has undermined our manufacturing base is now saying the gas industry should get massive subsidies," he said. "Their answer to the gas industry absolutely decimating the manufacturing industry is for tax payers to underwrite a rescue of the gas industry. "They say they want 'a free and open trading regime', yet they are calling for taxpayers to provide massive capital subsidies and to underwrite gas prices." On the reckoning of the NCCC, Australian gas prices have tripled since 2014, when the export terminals were built. WA has cheaper gas prices than the east coast because the State Government made companies set some gas aside for local use. While there is mention of gas reservation policy  which would see a set amount of gas set aside for domestic use, rather than export  it does not feature in the report's key points, which focus on public investment, increased production and pipelines. Dan Gocher, director of climate and environment at the Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility, accuses the industry of using COVID-19 as cover. "This is predatory behaviour from the gas industry," he argued. "They are opportunistically using the COVID-19 crisis to push through uneconomic, polluting plans dependent on taxpayer subsidies, which until the pandemic hit were beyond their wildest dreams." While aspects of the draft plan have widespread support within the gas sector  such as reduced environmental regulation and more streamlined approval processes  the construction of an east-west pipeline has received widespread criticism within the industry for its prohibitive cost. The interim report has an extensive list of people the NCCC's manufacturing taskforce spoke to in devising its plan. It includes a large number of executives from the energy and resources industry including gas giants Santos and Inpex, oil and gas explorers Pangea Resources and Blue Energy, chemical giants Dow, Orica, and IncitecPivot, oil and gas engineering consultancy Worley, and mining giants BHP and Rio Tinto. Only one firm from the clean energy sector was included in the list, EPC Technologies, and it was the company's senior gas and hydrogen expert who was consulted. However, the commission noted that the Manufacturing Taskforce was only one of its working groups. "The commission has liaised with well over a thousand stakeholders representing a broad cross-section of the business community including individuals and organisations with expertise in renewable energy," it said in a statement. "The commission has established a number of working groups to explore issues and bring forward ideas for further consideration, of which the manufacturing working group is one." 
Debate has surged in Russia around to what degree coronavirus must exacerbate existing conditions for it to be recorded as the cause of death, and it could be the reason why Russia's death rate is so low. Before she died in a Moscow hospital earlier this month, Liubov Kashaeva, 74, twice tested positive for COVID-19 but her death was not attributed to the virus, however. It was put down to the cancer she had been suffering from. "The medical death certificate ... said she died of a malignant tumour. Coronavirus was not mentioned anywhere," Kashaeva's daughter-in-law, Daria Kornilova said. Ms Kashaeva is one of thousands of Russians infected with COVID-19 whose deaths have been put down to other causes. Russia has registered the second highest number of infections globally wi9th over 308,000 global cases, and 2,972 deaths.  Those figures produce a death rate of 1.88 per 100,000 Russians, according to figures compiled by the Johns Hopkins University. The equivalent figure for the US, who have the most cases in the world, is 27.61 per 100,000 Americans, and 52.45 in Britain.  Comparatively in Australia, where 100 people have died from the virus the rate is 0.40. "We now know all the characteristics of COVID-19 sufficiently well," said pathologist Oleg Zairatyants, author of the Moscow Health Department guidelines for coronavirus autopsies. "The result (of the analysis) is objective and pronounced by the commission ... Unfortunately people are dying, but their cause of death is clear to us," he said, when asked about deaths not being attributed to COVID-19 even when someone had tested positive for the virus. However, the relatives of several deceased patients dispute that their loved ones would have died when they did had it not been for the virus. Ms Kashaeva had been diagnosed with late-stage bowel cancer in January but she was due to start chemotherapy and the family expected to have more time with her. On May 3, Ms Kashaeva was taken into hospital after feeling weak. Scans showed she'd developed pneumonia in both lungs, a common symptom of coronavirus infection, and two tests were taken, coming back positive.  Just 5 days later on May 8, Ms Kashaeva died. "Coronavirus killed our grandmother of course and we're grieving," Ms Kornilova said. "If it wasn't for coronavirus, with chemotherapy she would have held out for some time." Moscow, the epicentre of Russia's coronavirus outbreak, reports that over 60 per cent of deaths of people infected with coronavirus in April did not enter its death toll tally, and were put down to other causes. The Moscow Health Department said the way Russia counted coronavirus deaths was more accurate than other countries and cited the benefits of a nationwide testing programme which has seen over 7 million tests done. Ms Kornilova said she felt that the decision on how to classify her mother-in-law's death "depended on the party line. "And as far as I know, right now, the party line says ... that Russia's death toll must be as low as possible." The Kremlin said Russia's use of autopsies in determining cause of death set it apart from many western countries, who unlike Russia don't rely on a post-mortem analysis. "We're not hiding anything. Cause of death is determined by an autopsy. It's specifically the autopsy that allows us to produce an accurate judgment, on the basis of which cause of death can differ," said Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov Alexey Erlikh, head of intensive cardiac care at Moscow's Hospital 29, which has been designated to treat coronavirus, is one of many doctors that says the distinction is arbitrary. "Simply put, no one ever dies 'from' a virus. People die from complications resulting from a virus," Dr Erlikh said. "But they also die from the complications of a chronic illness that are caused by the virus. Some people believe that such deaths shouldn't be counted in the coronavirus death toll. I believe they should. "On this point I am strongly at odds with some of my colleagues, those top doctors whose pictures are hanging up all over the city." In Britain, all deaths of people who tested positive for coronavirus, and those with a negative test where coronavirus is suspected, enter the death toll, according to Dr Carl Heneghan. "We're not in a position to distinguish dying 'from' or 'with' coronavirus," he said. Speaking anonymously, a Moscow-based pathologist said that making a clear distinction between the two was virtually impossible. The World Health Organization (WHO) says it sees no problems with Russia's approach. "There is no conscious undercounting," Melita Vujnovic, the WHO's chief representative in Russia, told Russian state TV.  "It is possible that some recounts may be done or something else ... but right now I don't see anything serious." ABC/ Reuters 
It was the interview that sent hares running around the world. One month ago, Foreign Minister Marise Payne told the ABC's Insiders program that Australia would push for an independent international inquiry into the outbreak of COVID-19. Prime Minister Scott Morrison went a step further two days later, suggesting that the World Health Organization (WHO) needed tough new "weapons inspector" powers to investigate what caused the outbreak. It was political dynamite. Australia's friends and allies in Europe, still desperately scrambling to contain the pandemic at home, were startled. Why hadn't Australia got on the phone before wading into such fraught territory? The Chinese Government was  predictably  incensed, accusing Australia of launching a political attack on China and "pandering" to the United States. The furore intensified after China's ambassador hit back by warning of a consumer boycott, and it was supercharged by China's decision to hit Australian exports of beef, and lock in tariffs on barley. But one month after that first interview, the Morrison Government has now emerged battered and bloodied from the diplomatic fray, clutching a piece of paper, and declaring victory. Last night the World Health Assembly (WHA) passed a European Union motion calling for a "comprehensive, independent and impartial" investigation into how the pandemic started and the international health response. A record 137 countries  including both Australia and China  ended up co-sponsoring the motion, giving it overwhelming international endorsement. So was this a blazing victory for Australia and principled diplomacy? Or did the Federal Government blunder into a pointless stoush with China by going too hard, too early? One source in the Federal Government argues the decision to go both hard and early was quite deliberate. While the Government would have liked to gather allies before going public, its options looked threadbare. Australia would traditionally turn first to the US for help building an international coalition, but Australian officials were deeply anxious about the inflammatory rhetoric being used by both Donald Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo on the pandemic. The chances of a US-led inquiry getting broad international support looked perishingly small. The Government also worried that European countries  still reeling after being smashed by the first wave of coronavirus infections  would be too distracted to champion the principle of an inquiry. So, the United States was too keen, and Europe was not keen enough. The Coalition reasoned that if it wanted to kickstart an international debate about an inquiry, then it also wanted to frame the debate on its terms. In the days and weeks after that Insiders interview, both Mr Morrison and Senator Payne hit the phones to rally support. The Foreign Minister logged calls with almost 40 of her counterparts as well as the UN Secretary-General and the WHO's Director-General. The deadline was tight. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade quickly identified the best place to push the inquiry forward  a meeting of the World Health Assembly in Geneva, which was due in only four weeks.   But the initial response was cautious. In a phone call with Mr Morrison, French President Emmanuel Macron backed the broad principle of an inquiry. But he also made it clear that France was deeply preoccupied with containing the virus and did not want to see the international community fractured by an acrimonious debate over the outbreak. The Federal Government quickly realised that it would need to make concessions if it wanted to gather a substantial coalition of countries to push for an investigation. The big compromise came first. The Coalition holds deep-seated concerns about the WHO leadership, and worries it has drawn too close to China. Senator Payne said on Insiders the organisation should have nothing to do with the inquiry, saying that struck her as a "somewhat poacher and gamekeeper" arrangement. But with the clock ticking  and agreement elusive on which other body could possibly take the lead on an inquiry  Australia agreed to narrow its ambition. On May 7 Australia swung its support behind a European Union draft motion which called only for an "evaluation" of the outbreak by some of the WHO's independent review committees. The review committee was already a known quantity, as it had been set up in the wake of the Ebola outbreak.  Multilateral organisations like precedents, and Australian officials thought there was a good chance that other nations would be comfortable with it taking the reins of an investigation.  At this stage the list of co-sponsors was very small, including only the EU, Argentina and some minnows like Monaco and North Macedonia. Still, ducking behind the EU motion not only instantly gave Australia a bloc of allies, it also took some of the heat out of the delicate negotiations on the motion  particularly when it came to talks with Chinese officials. The Morrison Government seems to be betting that all it needs to do is hold its nerve and hold the line when it comes to China's trade threats. The Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister also toned down their rhetoric. Coalition ministers were unyielding in their call for an independent inquiry, but there was much less talk about giving the WHO "weapons inspector" powers. Meanwhile, Australian diplomats poured all their energy into trying to beef up the language in the EU motion to ensure it could provide a workable framework for a proper inquiry. The words "impartial" and "independent" were injected into the text. Simultaneously, officials worked to reassure European countries that the push for an inquiry wouldn't distract from the immediate crisis of tackling the outbreak. As the WHA meeting approached, the momentum behind the inquiry push quickly grew. Two days before the meeting, 62 countries  including major powers like India, South Korea, Japan and Indonesia  had signed on as co-sponsors. That number had swelled to more than 100 by Sunday night, before China finally climbed on board just before the vote on Tuesday. The motion passed by the WHA is a compromise. There is no specific mention of China. There are no new powers for the WHO. And the most likely review mechanism is an independent committee which sits within  not outside  the organisation. The Chinese Embassy in Canberra has been scathing. It says China was always willing to agree to a "scientific investigation" and Australia's initial call for an independent inquiry outside the WHO has floundered. Earlier this week it escalated the dispute further, issuing an extraordinarily contemptuous statement. "To claim the World Health Assembly's resolution is a vindication of Australia's call is nothing but a joke," it read. But Senator Payne argues Australia's key demands have been met, and the Coalition is celebrating the result at the WHA as a clear diplomatic victory. While the committee likely to take on the probe is a WHO body, Senator Payne maintains its expert members are not beholden to the organisation's leadership. "They are from the international system with very broad experience in a range of public health areas," she said. "They serve in their personal capacity, they are not, if you like, part of the WHO structure." The Government also points out that the motion specifically permits "scientific and collaborative field missions" to work out exactly how the disease made the jump from animals to humans.  Queensland senator Matt Canavan called the success of the motion a "massive vindication" for the Government, while Health Minister Greg Hunt said Australia "helped provide the impetus and the resolve" needed at the WHA to push the inquiry motion over the line. Not all foreign policy watchers are so convinced. Associate Professor Matthew Sussex from the Australian National University said Australia's attempt to get out in front of the issue "needlessly annoyed the EU, and further problematised our relationship with China". "There's a good argument to say that we stood to gain more by waiting," he said. "The EU would have gone to the WHA anyway, and Canberra could have played a middle role to mediate whatever hard line Washington had come up with, building consensus and a coalition in the process. "It was an own goal, and hardly a triumph for middle-power diplomacy." Other experts are quicker to give the Federal Government credit. The head of the National Security College, Rory Medcalf, said the Government's call for an independent inquiry was both principled and courageous. Professor Medcalf said the Government got off to a "somewhat ragged start" on its negotiations with other countries, but it "refined and evolved its approach pretty rapidly". "The diplomatic courage and the forthrightness of Australia really taking a stand on this issue will be borne out in the historical record," he said. 
There are now more than 5 million cases of coronavirus around the world, with a record 106,000 new cases recorded in the last 24 hours, the World Health Organization says. 1 million new cases are now being reported every two weeks WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said two-thirds of the new cases came from just four countries  the US, Russia, Brazil and India. "We still have a long way to go in this pandemic," Dr Tedros said. "We are very concerned about rising cases in low and middle-income countries." Latin America overtook the US and Europe in the past week to report the largest portion of new daily cases globally. It represents a new phase in the spread of the virus, which initially peaked in China in February before large-scale outbreaks in Europe and the United States. Latin America accounted for around a third of the 91,000 cases reported earlier this week. Europe and the United States each accounted for just over 20 per cent. A large number of those new cases came from Brazil, which recently surpassed Germany, France and the United Kingdom to become the third-largest outbreak in the world, behind the United States and Russia. Cases in Brazil are now rising at a daily pace second only to the US. The WHO has come under fire from US President Donald Trump, who accuses it of having mishandled the outbreak and favouring China. This week Mr Trump threatened to withdraw from the WHO and permanently withhold US funding. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Dr Tedros acknowledged having received a letter from Mr Trump, but declined to comment further. The WHO has announced a review into the response to the pandemic. "WHO calls for accountability more than anyone," Dr Tedros said of the review, while declining to give a timeline for it starting. "It has to be done and when it's done it has to be a comprehensive one." The first 41 cases of coronavirus were confirmed in Wuhan, China, on January 10 and it took the world until April 1 to reach its first million cases. Since then, about 1 million new cases have been reported every two weeks, according to a Reuters tally. At more than 5 million cases, the virus has infected more people in under six months than the annual total of severe flu cases, which the World Health Organization estimates is around 3 million to 5 million globally. The pandemic has officially claimed more than 326,000 lives, though the true number is thought to be higher as testing is still limited and many countries do not include fatalities outside hospitals. Over half of the total deaths have been recorded in Europe. Despite the continued increase in cases, many countries are opening schools and workplaces following weeks of lockdown that have stemmed the spread. Financial markets have also been boosted slightly by promising early results from the first US vaccine trial in humans. ABC/wires 
Thousands of people descended on British beaches on the UK's hottest day of the year, after the easing of coronavirus restrictions across England. With the official start of summer still a month away, the temperature reached 28.2 degrees Celsius at Santon Downham in Suffolk on Wednesday, with 27.8C recorded at London's Heathrow Airport. Popular seaside destinations, including Brighton, Bournemouth and Southend-on-Sea reported large midweek crowds. Under new rules in England, people are allowed to travel to leisure spots and meet one person outside their household, but are required to follow social-distancing guidelines. Tougher quarantine measures remain in place elsewhere in the UK, with the leaders of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland all sticking to the "Stay at Home" messaging. Southend Independent councillor Martin Terry said most people were observing social distancing and the council was doing everything it could to keep people safe. But some beachgoers on social media complained that not everyone was adhering to the recommendation to stay 6 feet (1.8 metres) apart. There were also long queues for seaside restaurants, including takeaway outlets serving traditional British fish and chips. Lockdown measures were eased in England last week following almost two months of restrictions. The UK's death toll from COVID-19 rose by 363 on Wednesday to 35,704, the highest tally in Europe and second in the world behind only the US. As many of its citizens visited beauty spots, the British Government pledged to have a "test, track and trace" program for coronavirus in place by June 1. It also sought to bring as many MPs as possible back to parliament by June 2. The dual announcements formed part of a strategy to persuade the UK that it is safe to move on to the next stage of easing the COVID-19 lockdown, with the reopening of schools for some younger children at the start of June.  Prime Minister Boris Johnson, who returned to work after a serious battle with COVID-19 last month, has been criticised for his Government's failure to have a national tracing system in place over the past 10 weeks.  "We're making fast progress in testing and tracing and I have great confidence that by June 1 we will have a system that will enable us, that will help us very greatly to defeat this disease," Mr Johnson said. British police issued more than 14,000 fines to lockdown flouters in England and Wales between March 27 and May 11, including 906 handed out to Londoners and 862 to repeat offenders. The penalty has now risen from 60 pounds ($111) to 100 pounds ($185). The unseasonably warm weather has seen many people throw caution to the wind as they look to socialise again after spending much of spring indoors. The average top temperature for London in May is 18C. ABC/wires 
Canberra is slowly emerging from the coronavirus pandemic  it has been free of known cases for most of this month. But while social distancing restrictions are easing, the economic consequences of containing the disease are just beginning to be measured. An estimated 8,700 Canberrans lost their jobs last month, the Australian Bureau of Statistics says. It was the largest monthly job loss in the bureau's dataset, which goes back four decades. Similarly, the number of Canberrans who are under-employed (working fewer hours than they want to) almost doubled to more than 22,000  another record increase. We know from the bureau's survey that almost every job lost in the ACT was casual or part-time. But is it also possible to tell which parts of the city will be the worst-affected? In the pandemic's early stages, a tech firm, Seer Data and Analytics, set about answering a similar question for the New South Wales Treasury's data analytics centre. Seer's chief data scientist, Adam Peaston, said the project's goal was to "shine a light on which communities will be suffering economically". This is not the same as finding the most disadvantaged areas, which are already well known. Instead, Seer modelled which areas were most vulnerable to the business restrictions put in place over the past two months. "We're comparing locations which have a high rate of people employed in vulnerable industries and vulnerable occupations within the context of COVID-19," Peaston says. "We then intersect those types of areas with areas where people are already struggling to keep pace with either their rent or mortgage. "This is where you'd expect to have the combination of large numbers of people losing their jobs and being unable to make payments towards their housing." Seer's technique, applied to ACT and Queanbeyan suburbs (excluding those with fewer than 1,000 people), suggests Canberra's fringes will suffer more than the rest of the city. The analysis weights two factors evenly: Four of the five most vulnerable suburbs are in Gungahlin  Casey, Bonner, Ngunnawal and Franklin  while nearby Macgregor is the other. Other areas of concern are the new Molonglo suburbs of Wright and Coombs which, like Gungahlin's fringes, are home to many families with relatively large mortgages. Meanwhile, Queanbeyan, Bruce and the student suburb of Acton have particularly high numbers of workers with at-risk jobs. Unsurprisingly, the least exposed areas in Canberra are the established, diplomatic-belt suburbs of the inner south, such as Yarralumla, Deakin and Forrest. While suburbs can change over time  the census data is now four years old  Peaston said governments and non-profits need to know where to look to find people in need before their lives fall into crisis. "I think these will be the places to watch carefully, to see if people in those areas are facing residual difficulties, even as restrictions ease," he said. "Perhaps businesses haven't been able to keep as many people employed, or give them enough hours. "There may be large numbers of people there who are about to tip over that housing security threshold." Even more so, he added, if a second wave of COVID-19 cases sparks another lockdown, and even greater economic losses. 
Police in Hong Kong have fired tear gas and used a water cannon and pepper spray to disperse thousands of people protesting against Beijing's plan to directly impose national security laws on the city, the biggest flare-up there since COVID-19 lockdowns began. Protesters took to the shopping district of Causeway Bay on Sunday chanting "Revolution of our time. Liberate Hong Kong" and "Hong Kong Independence, the only way out".  The protest was the first since Beijing proposed national security laws on Thursday and posed a fresh challenge to Chinese President Xi Jinping as authorities struggle to tame public opposition to China's tightening grip over the global financial hub. Hong Kong democracy activists say the national security legislation is evidence of Beijing's encroachment on freedoms guaranteed to Hong Kong under its "one country, two systems" style of governance. The arrangement, which has been in place since the former UK colony's return to Chinese rule in 1997, guarantees the city broad freedoms not seen on the mainland, including a free press and independent judiciary. Police raised blue flags, warning protesters to disperse, before firing multiple rounds of tear gas. They later fired a water cannon at the protesters. At least 120 people were arrested, mostly on charges of unlawful assembly, police said in a Facebook post. They said in a separate post protesters threw bricks and splashed unidentified liquid at officers, injuring at least four members of the police's media liaison team.  They warned that such behaviour was against the law and police would pursue the matter. Earlier in the afternoon, prominent activist Tam Tak-chi was arrested during the protest for what police said was unauthorised assembly.  Mr Tam said he was giving a "health talk" and was exempt from social-distancing measures that prohibit gatherings of more than eight people. Sunday's rallies are a continuation of a months-long pro-democracy movement that began last year and has at times descended into violence between police and protesters. The new law, expected to be passed on May 28, would bypass the city's legislature and allow the Hong Kong Government to set up mainland agencies in the city. There are fears it will allow Chinese agents to arbitrarily arrest people for activities deemed to be pro-democracy. Police conducted stop-and-search operations in Causeway Bay and warned people not to violate a ban on gatherings of more than eight people, imposed to curb the spread of coronavirus. "Now is the beginning of the end, and time is really running out in Hong Kong, and that's the reason for us  even under the outbreak of COVID-19  we still need to gather our strength to protest," democracy activist Joshua Wong said. Authorities in Beijing and Hong Kong have said the proposed laws are necessary and will not harm the city's autonomy. "These radical claims and illegal violence are extremely worrying," Chief Secretary Matthew Cheung said in a blog post. "We must face [this issue] squarely. If the situation is not effectively contained, it may be elevated to the level of endangering national security." Hong Kong was handed back to China with no framework for what would happen after the year 2047, leaving the city to carve an identity out of two ideologically opposed empires. Secretary for Security John Lee said the laws would help maintain Hong Kong's long-term prosperity. A small group of democracy activists protested outside Beijing's Liaison Office, chanting, "National security law is destroying two systems". A water-cannon truck was parked outside, while dozens of riot police were deployed across the city. Avery Ng of the League for Social Democrats pasted protest signs on a plaque outside the Liaison Office, despite warnings from police. He described it as an "evil law" and appealed to Hong Kong people to come out and protest against it. "It's a moveable red line. In future they can arrest, lock up and silence anyone they want in the name of national security. We have to resist it," he said. Some local commentators have described the proposal as "a nuclear option" that is part of Mr Xi's high-stakes power play. A backlash intensified on Saturday as nearly 200 political figures from around the world said in a statement the proposed laws were a "comprehensive assault on the city's autonomy, rule of law and fundamental freedoms". China dismissed other countries' complaints as "meddling" and rejected concerns the proposed laws would harm foreign investors. Wires 
It's been less than two months since the Federal Government announced its $70 billion JobKeeper package for Australians who have lost their jobs or been forced out of work due to the coronavirus pandemic.  Eligible employees began to receive the payment from the start of this month, backdated to 30 March when the scheme was first announced. However some businesses have come under fire for asking their employees to work so they can "earn" the payment. That's raised questions about whether employers can make their employees work or perform other duties to receive the JobKeeper payment  so the ABC has spoken to the experts to find out.  JobKeeper is part of the Federal Government's $320 billion economic support package to subsidise wages for businesses impacted by the coronavirus pandemic. It was designed to help employers pay their employees during the coronavirus pandemic for up to six months, with businesses claiming a reimbursement from the Federal Government through the Australian Tax Office. Eligible businesses must first apply for the scheme before nominating their employees to receive a fortnightly payment of $1,500 before tax. The Federal Government estimates that some 3.5 million Australian workers will benefit from the payment, and more than 910,000 businesses have applied for the scheme to date. "Technically under JobKeeper, it's not lawful to make an employee earn the JobKeeper allowance," said Zana Bytheway, executive director at employment legal rights service JobWatch. Ms Bytheway said JobKeeper was meant to help businesses which had seen a downturn in business because of the coronavirus pay their employees. "Say you work two days a week and have been stood down as a consequence of coronavirus, therefore you are home for that period of time and you are an eligible employee to receive a JobKeeper allowance," Ms Bytheway explained. "The employer is required to pass on the full benefit of that $1,500 to you even though your income would have been $1,000 per fortnight." But JobKeeper isn't only available for those who are now suddenly without work due to coronavirus. "You're also able to receive JobKeeper if you are working and you have got the capacity to work," Ms Bytheway added. It depends on the type of change. Your hours can be reduced temporarily as part of the "JobKeeper enabling stand down directions" made by your employer, which is part of the Fair Work Act and allows employers to reduce the number of days or hours an employee usually works. The Fair Work Ombudsman said an eligible employee could be given the direction if they were unable to be usefully employed for their normal working days or hours due to the pandemic or measures taken by the Government to slow the spread of the virus. But the direction does not allow for employers to increase the number of hours their employees work.  "They [employees] can't be forced or coerced to work more than they usually would," Jannette Armstrong, Tasmanian secretary of the United Workers Union, said. Employers also can't ask their employees to work additional hours to mimic the number they would have to work to typically receive $1,500 a fortnight. The Fair Work Ombudsman says that's "not likely to be reasonable". But that is not to say working more hours is out of the question while receiving JobKeeper payments.  Employers can ask employees if they want to work more hours, but Fair Work says any increase "needs to be reasonable". Whether employees choose to work the extra hours offered though is up to the employee  and they can refuse if it isn't reasonable. "There's a whole host of reasons why it might not be reasonable or realistic for a person's hours to be increased," Ms Armstrong said. "A lot of people are in these new situations, where they're having to homeschool and having to care for other people who might have been at school or childcare and now can't because of the shutdown and isolation." Similar to the hours you work, the duties you perform at work can also be changed.  Ms Bytheway said in order for that to happen, certain conditions needed to be met. "You have to consider safety, you have to consider the skills and competencies of the person in order to do that and, of course, if there are licences and qualifications involved, that is also a consideration," she said. Fair Work said the direction also had to be reasonable, otherwise it did not apply to the employee. The duties must also be related to the operation of the business they work at, meaning odd jobs likely won't fit the bill. Some duties can also attract a higher base pay rate, depending on an award or enterprise agreement. If that's the case, Fair Work says the employee needs to be paid at the higher rate.  By the same token, employers cannot reduce an employee's rate if the duties they're now performing typically attract a lower base pay rate than what the employee usually receives. Employers are also unable to change the duties of employees immediately. Fair Work said employers needed to notify employees about any change in usual duties at least three days before the change was made through the JobKeeper enabling direction, consult with employees about the direction and keep a written record of it, and give the employee the agreed direction in writing. Ms Armstrong encouraged employees to raise the matter with their employer directly if they were comfortable about that. "But I would absolutely recommend that they get some support and some advice about their rights and entitlements before doing so," she said. Ms Bytheway said it could also potentially be a JobKeeper dispute, and would be considered as a matter for the Fair Work Commission.  "They can then arbitrate, mediate or conciliate the disputes and essentially can make an order in relation to the direction," she said. A Fair Work spokesperson said anyone with an urgent enquiry about their workplace obligations could contact the Fair Work Ombudsman on 13 13 94 or through the website. 
The US ambassador to Australia has played down a suggestion from his Secretary of State Mike Pompeo that his nation could "simply disconnect" from Australia if Victoria's trade deal with Beijing threatened its telecommunication security. On Sunday morning, Mr Pompeo said while he was not aware of the detail of Victoria's agreement, it could impact his nation's Five Eyes intelligence-sharing partnership with Australia. In an interview with Sky News, Mr Pompeo warned the Belt and Road agreement with the Andrews Government increased the Chinese communist regime's ability to do "harm". China's trillion-dollar Belt and Road initiative (BRI) is a global infrastructure push aiming to recreate the glory days of China's ancient Silk Road trade routes. The highly controversial scheme has been panned by many Western democracies, including Australia. More and more countries are choosing to ink agreements with China on its trillion-dollar Belt and Road initiative, but what are countries actually agreeing to when they sign on? But Victoria has gone it alone on signing up to the infrastructure initiative, with Premier Daniel Andrews inking a Memorandum of Understanding with China in 2018 and committing to deepen the state's involvement in 2019. The non-legally-binding agreement allows Victorian infrastructure experts to get access to the hundreds of billions of dollars of projects slated for the Belt and Road. It also encourages Chinese infrastructure firms to establish a presence in Victoria and to bid for major infrastructure projects. "I don't know the nature of those projects precisely," Mr Pompeo told Sky News today. "To the extent they have an adverse impact on our ability to protect telecommunications from our private citizens, or security networks for our defence and intelligence communities  we simply disconnect, we will simply separate. "We are going to preserve trust in networks for important information. We hope our friends and allies, especially our Five Eyes partners like Australia, do the same." Mr Pompeo said the scheme broadly came at "some cost" to those who signed on. "Every nation has its own sovereign right to make decisions for itself, and I suppose Victoria has some rights that it can undertake but every citizen of Australia should know that every one of those Belt and Road projects needs to be looked at incredibly closely," he said. On Sunday afternoon, the US ambassador, Arthur Culvahouse Jr, released a statement in response to coverage of Mr Pompeo's interview, saying he wanted to "set the record straight". He said after Mr Pompeo was asked about a "very remote hypothetical", he had carefully noted that he was not across the detail of Victoria's Belt and Road agreement. "The United States has absolute confidence in the Australian Government's ability to protect the security of its telecommunications networks and those of its Five Eyes partners," Mr Culvahouse said. "We have made no secret of our concerns about 5G, and we commend Australia for its leadership on the issue. "We are not aware that Victoria has engaged in any concrete projects under BRI, let alone projects impinging on telecommunications networks, which we understand are a federal matter.  "If there were telecommunications initiatives that we thought put the integrity of our networks at risk, of course we would have to take a close look at that, as the Secretary suggested." The State Opposition has criticised the Andrews Government for continuing with the infrastructure deal despite increased tensions between Canberra and Beijing. China has reacted angrily to the Federal Government's push for an independent inquiry into the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic. Beijing has recently imposed tariffs of 80 per cent on Australian barley and put an import ban on four Australian abattoirs, moves which the Morrison Government says are unrelated to the inquiry. But Victorian Treasurer Tim Pallas last week made a connection to the events, saying: "I don't suppose it would come as a surprise to anybody that this was the consequence of the way that the Federal Government had conducted themselves." He earlier told a parliamentary committee the state would "absolutely not" be putting the deal on hold while the inquiry was conducted. When asked about Mr Pompeo's comments at a press conference on Sunday morning, Mr Andrews said while he had not seen the interview, "my position on these matters is very well known". "It's all about Victoria jobs and we'll continue to work at a strong partnership," he said. "Doesn't mean we agree on everything, there are many things we don't agree on. "But what I think all of us here and indeed both parts of our partnership, both Victoria, Australia and China  surely we all have to concede and we all have to recognise that a good, strong partnership is in everyone's interests." A Government spokesperson later said the Belt and Road framework was "about creating opportunities for Victorian businesses and local jobs  opportunities that will be more important than ever as we rebuild from the coronavirus pandemic". "Telecommunications regulation is the responsibility of the Commonwealth Government," the spokesperson continued. "Victoria has not, and will not in the future, agree to telecommunications projects under the BRI." 
NSW has recorded just one new case of COVID-19, as authorities announced beauty and tanning salons and nail bars will be allowed to reopen from June 1. Gyms will remain closed for now, however. NSW Health Minister Brad Hazzard said it was a "good day" to be able to flag the new openings.  "Of all ofthe requests I've had as HealthMinister in the last three months,this has been the one that I thinkhas topped the barrel," he said.  "It hascertainly been a very earnest effortfrom a lot of people to make sure wecould open [the salons]." Mr Hazzard advised those beauty business would need to have "a COVID-safe plan" before they reopened, and adhere to 1.5-metre social distancing. "Your task is to not only deliver the services that people need and want, but also make sure they are kept safe," he said. Mr Hazzard also said he was keen to get gyms open as soon as possible, but there were numerous safety elements involved.  He said NSW Health was working with the gym industry to "address the range of issues". Mr Hazzard said aspects  including the use of equipment, the close proximity of participants in elements like spin classes and changerooms at gyms and swimming pools  were all problematic. "There are a whole lot of factors here," he said. The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in the state is now 3,087. Mr Hazzard said the number of tests was fewer than was liked at 6,809, down from 8,995 on the previous 24 hours.  The total number of people tested in NSW to date is now 418,427.  NSW Health's Dr Christine Selvey said the one new recorded case was a person who had returned from the United Kingdom and there was "no risk" of community transmission. NSW Transport Minister Andrew Constance outlined plans ahead of school attendance returning to normal from tomorrow. Parents have been advised to drop children at school where possible, or have students walk or ride if they can. He said the aim was to minimise the numbers of people using public transport. So far numbers have been reduced by 3.3 per cent week on week, with bus use down by 10 per cent. Mr Constance also said there had been 85 million vehicle movements per day, compared with normal levels of 105 million a day. Other measures to be introduced will be a shuttle service running from Moore Park to the city, and also marshals and security teams working in 20 key interchanges including Blacktown, Hurstville and Chatswood. 
Jan Abel and her partner Murray were among a dozen people who signed up to an eco coffin-making workshop with the hope of reducing their environmental footprint  in both life and death. At the first session, the couple  from Gawler, South Australia  began creating shrouds using natural fibres and designing flat-pack coffins. Murray's sketch featured a vibrant symmetrical motif incorporating his life's many passions. "I'm not ready to go yet so, say in ten or 15 years' time, what's your role?" he asked doula Helen Roberts, who he wanted to help with his end-of-life planning. "I hope in 20 years' time I'll still be there [to help]," she replied. "I don't want to die tomorrow, but I might." Just days after their conversation, Murray had a heart attack and died. "He was a lovely person. We had so much fun," Ms Abel said.  "The day before he died, we were so lucky to be put into [coronavirus isolation] with all the things that we could share together, with art and music and all those sorts of things. "But sadly, by the next morning, he was gone." Murray's family and friends worked together to plan his farewell and decorate a flat-pack coffin. Ms Abel said she wouldn't have known what he wanted unless they had discussed it at the workshop. "I was able to transfer what he wanted onto the coffin and complete it as he wanted to the best of my ability," she said. "It's just been made beautiful because of this project. It would have been so much harder to deal with if I hadn't been able to participate and do his coffin." Organiser Abby Buckley said Murray's death made the eco coffin project more poignant. "We all got to use our skills and think about how to apply our skills sooner than we were planning," she said. "We had this lovely moment where we could come together in COVID-19 restrictions and work with Jan." The program was quickly booked out when it launched in October and has since moved online due to social gathering restrictions. "It's actually worked to our advantage  having the pandemic and people being able to be in their own cocoon and own space to really think about what death is for them and how they want to their body to be treated when they die." Participants have shared their creations  made by crocheting, sewing, felting and painting  and received online talks from experts about dying sustainably. "In Australia, the majority of people are really trying hard to change their ways to live a sustainable life," Ms Buckley said. "We're trying to move from a fossil fuel economy to a renewable economy  And yet, it's like all that thinking goes out the window when we die." "We're learning a dialogue, we're becoming more informed so that when we are working with the professionals in this industry, it's easier for them because they can have a more empowered conversation." Since 2008, more than 170 people have chosen a natural burial at Wirra Wonga in Adelaide's northern suburbs. The area hugs the perimeter of the Enfield Memorial Park and mirrors the native vegetation of adjacent Folland Park Reserve. It was the first dedicated site in Australia where bodies could be naturally buried in biodegradable coffins or wrappings. Graves are marked with trees instead of headstones. "I think for people who are passionate about sustainability, have a lot of values about conservation, this is an appealing process and appealing way to say farewell to the planet," Adelaide Cemeteries Authority chief executive Robert Pitt said. He said natural burials provided consumer choice but also made good business sense. "It's very low-maintenance. It very quickly and very sustainably provides some greenness and better aesthetics to a cemetery," Mr Pitt said. "I'd like to be able to come back in 100 years and see it  my vision is the natural burial ground would have extended  there'll be native trees and scrubs here." Mr Pitt said his sustainability plans extended across all aspects of the business, including the installation of new cremators to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and seeking higher environmental management accreditation. "I'd also love to get rid of any bits of plastic and wire in floral tributes  they're absolutely glorious but we do have some troubles recycling those," he said. "We just think it's the right thing to do and it's also sustainable  there are a lot of reasons why we would do it, in fact, there are very few reasons why we wouldn't." 
Word that Target Country was coming to my hometown was a huge deal  perhaps the biggest news since a popular fast food joint set up shop. In Warwick, in country Queensland, we'd heard all about Target. Many of us knew it well from our trips to the city. But now, we wouldn't have to beg our parents to drive hours for a taste of metropolitan fashion, we could simply duck down to the glossy new shop on Grafton Street. And boy, did we think it was flash. Labelled the 'Country' version of the big city store, it looked and felt like the real deal. There was department store lighting. Nice change rooms. Trendy, better quality clothes you might see in magazines. When Target Country opened in Warwick, two hours west of Brisbane, teenage girls like my sisters, friends and I could spend hours perusing the store's aisles. But experiences like those may soon come to an end. Some stores will close their doors for good within the year and Warwicks shop looks likely to be turned into a Kmart. "It will be massive for Target Country to close," one of my cousins who lives in town tells me. Just this week, she ducked into Target Country for an emergency pair of tracksuit pants for her spirited five-year-old son. "It's so handy that Target Country isn't in the shopping centre. You can park out the front, run in and run out. "If the store in Warwick closed, I'd also really miss having somewhere to go for affordable, yet quality, cotton sheets, towels and good basic clothes for myself." It might sound a little token, but in our town at least, Target Country was its own little thriving community. Our friends worked there, my sister joining them when she turned 14 years and nine months. She worked with people our parents knew, teenage girls we played netball with and older boys she never would've dared to speak to otherwise. You'd always know when there was a school social or formal coming up in Warwick  Target Country would be teeming with young people ready to spend their casual job wages. "It was probably one of the only places in Warwick where teenage girls could buy a cute top or skirt because it was trying to be fashionable but it was also pretty affordable," my sister remembers. For some, it offered something even more, including for one local who was getting married. "She bought her bridesmaids their dresses at Target Country," my sister says. "I can still remember it was a pale orange synthetic silk dress with thin straps. It came below the knee and had quite a flowy skirt. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "All the bridesmaids came in and tried them on and it was a really exciting day for everyone." For us bush kids, Target Country introduced us to a whole new world of homewares, toys and electronics. We learned to navigate the concept of laybuy. We had a broader range of bras to choose from. We could even buy activewear. How would we  and many other rural communities  feel if we lost Target Country? Like we'd lost a part of our little town  and our history. 
Domestic violence victims on temporary visas are being trapped in dangerous situations because they are unable to access crucial support, experts say,and the coronavirus pandemic appears to be exacerbating their plight. Family and domestic violence support services:1800 Respect National Helpline: 1800 737 732Women's Crisis Line (NSW): 1800 656 463Safe Steps Crisis Line (Vic): 1800 015 188Men's Referral Service: 1300 766 491Lifeline (24-hour Crisis Line): 131 114Relationships Australia: 1300 364 277 Despite several inquiries recommending changes to Australia's visa system, advocates say the government has consistently failed to take action, leaving many temporary visa holders experiencing abuse without access to key health and social services, including Centrelink, Medicare and housing. Perpetrators also commonly use victims' temporary migration status as a weapon of coercion, meaning many feel pressured to stay in violent relationships.  With more than two million people in Australia on temporary visas, advocates are calling for urgent protections, with family violence services reporting COVID-19 restrictions have triggered a surge in calls from women locked out of the system. It comes following the death this week of Western Sydney woman, Kamaljeet Sidhu, who was allegedly murdered by her husband less than a month after police took out an apprehended violence order against him.  Ms Sidhu, 27, had moved with her husband from India to Australia two years ago, and was on a student visa at the time of her death. Michal Morris, the chief executive of inTouch Multicultural Centre Against Family Violence, said that since March her service had seen a 20 per cent increase in the number of women calling for help with family violence, many of whom are temporary visa holders.  "Because they're on a temporary visa, they have very limited access to employment and Centrelink benefits. They're also not eligible for any of the government stimulus package supports and ... tend to work as casuals or in industries which were shut down pretty quickly, for example restaurants or beauty salons," Morris told ABC News.  Refuges often have to make "difficult decisions" to turn away women on temporary visas, Morris said, because their lack of income and access to housing often means they have to stay longer than other women fleeing violence. "We're forcing support services to make really horrible choices. If a woman is in a legitimate relationship in Australia and is experiencing family violence, we need to be able to support her to leave the relationship, but also to recover." Marie Segrave, an associate professor of criminology at Monash University, said many women also avoid seeking help with domestic violence because they're being coerced by partners who use their temporary migration status as "leverage for abuse".  "The main thing we have consistently failed to recognise in Australia is that perpetrators are enabled and emboldened by the limits on what support we provide to women on temporary migration visas," Dr Segrave told ABC News.  For example, Dr Segrave said she had encountered cases of women on temporary visas whose partners have forced them to work more hours than they're permitted to, then threatened to report them to immigration under the false pretence they'll be deported. The partners of other women have threatened to withdraw sponsorship of their visas if they do not comply with demands.  "These women are invisible, and the system supports their perpetrators remaining invisible and not being held to account," Dr Segrave said. "The refusal to recognise that temporary migration creates specific forms of vulnerability ... means women's safety is compromised repeatedly, because we know what the consequences are." These vulnerabilities have been examined in detail by a series of major inquiries over the last decade, all of which have recommended specific and urgent reforms, including to address the inconsistencies in access to services between states. This includes the Australian Law Reform Commission in 2011, Victoria's Royal Commission into Family Violence in 2016, the NSW Domestic Violence Death Review team in 2017, and the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs in 2019. In its latest report, published in March, the NSW DV Death Review Team said it had made several recommendations directed at the Commonwealth Government to address the vulnerability of women on temporary visas, an issue it said was reflected in "a number of cases" in previous review periods.  However, it said, "there has been very little, if any, action in response to these recommendations".  The review team said it had been advised by settlement services that "vulnerable or impermanent visa status remains one of, if not the most, significant issue for their clients who are experiencing domestic violence". And the Senate Inquiry into dowry abuse last year made several recommendations pertaining to Australia's migration program, urging the Commonwealth Government to consider reforms including that family violence protections in the Migration Regulations (1994) be extended beyond certain visa categories and that a temporary visa be made available for holders who are experiencing serious family violence. But more than a year after the inquiry handed down its final report, the Government has yet to respond. Hayley Foster, chief executive of Women's Safety NSW, said the lack of meaningful action means frontline workers face "heart-wrenching" situations on a daily basis.  "When we contact these women, say after a police incident, to ask them how they would like us to support them, we feel so helpless in being unable to offer them real solutions," Foster said.  "It really is a terrible feeling when you go home at the end of the day knowing that women and children are essentially being forced to live in terror because they have nowhere else to go." Foster said the National Advocacy Group on Women on Temporary Visas Experiencing Violence had told the government that "this is a dangerous gap in the domestic violence service system, with lives at stake" but "we simply haven't seen the political leadership in addressing it".  "We need to reform the migration system so that all women on temporary visas who experience domestic violence and their dependents can access protections, services and justice," Foster said.  "How urgent is this problem? Women are dying." A spokesperson for Communities and Justice NSW said the Government was committed to supporting all women experiencing domestic and family violence and funds "a number of initiatives" to help overcome the barriers faced by women on temporary protection visas.  They said the Government had also raised the need for "further support" for victims on temporary visas with the federal government "on multiple occasions".  "This was most recently discussed at this week's Women's Safety Council COAG meeting attended by all relevant officials and Ministers," the spokesperson said. "Senior officials are working closely on solutions to address this issue." Dr Segrave said there had been "some commitment" to fixing the problem, including by recognising it in the fourth national plan to reduce violence against women and children, but that it had "clearly dropped off the agenda". "Women's safety, the rate of family violence in our community, the kinds of harm that are occurring and the long-term impacts  this is absolutely a national emergency," she said. "And we are missing a significant opportunity to address it,."  
Former Papua New Guinea prime minister Peter O'Neill has been charged with misappropriation, official corruption and abuse of office. Mr O'Neill was arrested by police at Jackson's International Airport in Port Moresby on Saturday afternoon after flying back from Brisbane where he had been stranded because of COVID-19 lockdowns. Police say the investigation surrounds the purchase of two generators from Israel for 50 million kina ($21.8 million) when Mr O'Neill was leading the country. In a statement, Assistant Commissioner of Crimes Hodges Ette alleged Mr O'Neill directed payments for the purchase of the generators without due consideration for procurement processes, without approval of parliament and without a tender process. "Mr O'Neill directed the National Executive Council to convene and approved the payment of K50 million for the generators after the purchase was made," he said. Mr O'Neill has described the case as "highly politicised" and defended the handling of the purchase. "I look forward to having my day in court soon so that the truth can prevail and this injustice corrected and exposed," he said in a statement. Mr O'Neill also questioned why current Prime Minister James Marape, who was finance minister at the time, was not being investigated. On Facebook, Mr Marape said "the work of police would not be impeded by myself as Prime Minister". He urged people to respect Mr O'Neill and the legal process. Mr O'Neill led Papua New Guinea for seven years, before quitting in 2019 after a string of high-profile resignations from his government.  Police attempted to arrest Mr O'Neill in October last year over a different issue.  He denied any wrongdoing and said it was a "political witch hunt". Police withdrew that warrant after Mr O'Neill challenged its validity in court. Police said the former prime minister will be allowed bail and will be expected to be quarantined at his own residence for the next 14 days after being interviewed, in line with current COVID-19 regulations. 
Weather forecasters say one-third of Western Australia may receive rain due to a "once-in-a-decade" storm, as the remnants of ex-Tropical Cyclone Mangga impact the coast. A severe weather warning is in place south-west of a line from Onslow to Esperance, but the Bureau of Meteorology (BOM) said it was still too early to pinpoint exactly which towns would be most severely impacted. The worst of the incoming wild weather is forecast to hit the north-west coast this afternoon, before the storm heads further south towards Perth. BOM forecaster Jessica Lingard said wind gusts were increasing at coastal towns  including Carnarvon and Exmouth  as the leading edge of the system began to move through, and conditions were expected to worsen further south as the day continued. But Ms Lingard said a deep, low-pressure system coming in from the south was forecast to cause hazardous conditions in the south-west tonight. "We are going to expect to see a couple of smaller low-pressure systems forming off the west coast and anywhere around wherever those lows form, we'll start to see some gusts that could reach up to 130kph," Ms Lingard said. "They'll be mostly coastal locations, but we will be seeing some stronger wind gusts inland as well." Heavy rainfall of up to 100 millimetres, plus abnormally high tides, are also forecast. "We are looking to see rain across much of the western third of the state, coastal areas are obviously going to see a little bit more than those inland," Ms Lingard said. Ex-Tropical Cyclone Mangga was downgraded to a tropical low in the early hours of Saturday morning as it moved south-west of the Cocos Keeling Islands and towards WA's north-west coast. The storm is expected to produce destructive winds of up to 130 kilometres per hour, heavy rainfall and unusually high tides to over 1,000 kilometres of coastline as it travels south from Sunday morning until Monday. BOM state manager James Ashley said the breadth of the warning area was unusual, spanning from Karratha to Esperance, including Perth. "This is a really rare event for WA," he said. "Not only is it unusual for the time of year, it extends across a large part of the state." In Perth, the wet weather is forecast to continue throughout the week. Mr Ashley said it was difficult to pinpoint exactly which areas will be hardest hit by the storms. "The message is that the whole west coast is at risk with this event, we're expecting to see multiple centres," he said. "While one system might impact the northern half of the coast, another system might impact the south-west." Department of Fire and Emergency Services (DFES) acting assistant commissioner Jon Broomhall said people need to act now to secure their homes. "Normally, our storms come from the south-west," he said. "This is going to come from the north-west so it'll test people's buildings, sheds, and all those unsecured items. "We're asking people to secure property, make sure everything loose is tied down." Mr Broomhall also warned people not head out on the water. "We don't need our marine rescue volunteers' lives put at risk by people making silly decisions to go boating or surfing in these conditions." Waves along the coast are expected to reach up to 8 metres high, likely causing widespread beach erosion. Fire bans are also in place for the southern half of WA, with people told to halt any back-burning programs they had scheduled at their properties. "We don't want fires running and a storm at the same time," Mr Broomhall said. "So please, extinguish your planned burn now." Electricity distributor Western Power said its crews were preparing for potentially significant outages and disruption to the grid. "No matter what happens, we're ramping up our crews in preparation to respond to whatever this storm does produce in the way of outages," Western Power spokesman Paul Entwistle said. Specialist crews would be ready to assess any power hazards reported by the community, Mr Entwistle added. "During the storm, if you do see a fallen power line or any damage to the network, please stay 8 metres clear at least, and make the safe call to Western Power on 13 13 51," Mr Entwistle said. He also said people should check their yards for any items or branches which could be flung into power lines during the storm. With intrastate borders now open, crowds had been expected on highways leading out of Perth but the severe weather warning caused many to revise their plans. Mr Broomhall said people should avoid travelling during the storm, particularly Perth holiday-makers who had travelled to the South West. "I understand people want to get out and about but the advice is to travel home early," he said. "Absolutely try and get back home as soon as you can." Jonelle Jones, manager of the Crooked Carrot cafe on Forrest Highway south of Perth, said most customers had told her they planned to be off the road by Sunday morning before the storm hit. "[Drivers] are concerned, so they are going to go home and make sure everything is tied down," she said. While Sunday was expected to be quieter at the cafe, Ms Jones said the early part of the weekend was very busy. "Roads are back to some sort of normal," she said.  "It's amazing to see it so busy, so quickly." She said customers had been telling her they just wanted to be on the road  "just to be free again"  after travel restrictions were lifted. "There's a lot visiting family, that has probably been the biggest [reason for travel], is getting back to see their family," Ms Jones said. Mandurah resident Bev Baldwin was travelling to Margaret River and Augusta to go electric biking with her family, but decided to scale back the trip ahead of the storm. "We were thinking of going down for the weekend, but we decided not to go for the whole weekend, we're just going to go for the day," she said. "It's just nice. When you know you can't do something, you just think 'oh, but I want to do it'." No new COVID-19 cases were recorded in WA on Saturday, almost a week after restrictions were eased. There are no longer any confirmed cases in regional WA after a patient in the Goldfields recovered. There are just two active coronavirus cases left in WA  both are recovering at home in Perth. However, WA's total number of cases was revised up to 560 after three historical cases were identified through blood tests. Two of the cases, which were connected to cruise ships, had already recovered from the disease when they entered WA. The remaining case was a returned overseas traveller, who had contact with a known case and self-isolated when she became ill. The Health Department said the historical cases were no longer infectious and therefore posed no risk to the public. Latest information from the WA Health Department 
The Sydney property market has seen rent prices in the city drop by more than $100 amid the coronavirus pandemic as renters return home or move in with others to share costs. Inner Sydney currently has a 13.8 per cent rental vacancy rate, compared with 6.5 per cent last year, the latest data from SQM Research shows. Weekly rental prices in the CBD have also fallen by more than $100-a-week, compared with the same time last year. "We've never seen anything like it," said Grant Ashby, the director of Sydney Cove Property. "In our time, it's always been a corporate market. This is the first time we've seen such a drop in rents." Property experts say as well as a drop in weekly prices across the city  known worldwide for its high cost of living  vacancies have skyrocketed. "There's more scope now in terms of vacancies for tenants to negotiate a lower rent than there has been in any time that I can remember," said Chris Martin from the City Futures Research Centre at UNSW.  For the first time in years, the market has given renters the confidence to shop around and aim big in a market that has in past years locked many people out of their ideal home. "It's definitely a renter's market," Sydneysider Tim Walker said at a Surry Hills inspection. "We're looking to get something a bit bigger and also I guess to take advantage of the savings," he said. "We've just been pretty lucky that we've found a few places that are probably a bit cheaper by, say, $100 or more, than what they'd normally be," said rental inspector Matthew Baker. "Well, what I'm paying for now, I could get a place here for the same price but so much better," Riley Ellem said after seeing a unit on York Street in the City. The changes within the market are being caused by a number of factors related to the coronavirus pandemic, including renters returning home and relationships taking the next step.  "People are moving in with other people, people are flying back overseas, if they're students, they're leaving," said Parramatta property manager Bernie Mitchell.  Living closer to the city is now an option for many who thought it would never be possible and experts say that if you are thinking of making the change, now is the time to do it. "It went quickly down, it will go quickly back up again," Grant Ashby said. For those whose income or living arrangements have been unaffected by the pandemic, one expert said cheaper rent is not off the table. "Even people who aren't technically affected by COVID can talk to their real estate agent or talk to their landlord about reducing the rent," Dr Chris Martin said. "Because the market has moved down as well."  Find out more 
There have been reports that China is considering escalating its trade war with Australia by targeting more Australian exports. Chinese officials have reportedly drawn up a list of potential goods including dairy, wine, seafood, oatmeal and fruit, that may face stricter quality checks or tariffs if political tensions don't ease. But Beijing will have to be mindful of which Australian-produced goods they target if they don't want to hurt Chinese interests. Why? Because Chinese investors own some of Australia's largest agricultural and food manufacturing companies that export to China. There is no publicly available register in Australia that shows the extent of Chinese investment in Australian-based companies. Calls to the offices of Agriculture Minister David Littleproud and Treasurer Josh Frydenberg proved fruitless. However, Professor Peter Drysdale from the Australian National University has painstakingly compiled some of the investment data by cross-checking figures from sources such as the Foreign Investment Review Board with company reports and news stories. The information is available on ANU's Chinese Investment in Australia (CHIIA) database of Mainland Chinese direct commercial investment in Australia. A separate joint project between KPMG and Sydney University helps to further reveal the extent of Chinese outbound direct investment in Australia. Here are some of examples of Chinese investment in Australia's export industries that could face uncertainty in the current trade environment. Earlier this month, China suspended imports from four of Australia's largest abattoirs  three in Queensland and one in NSW  on what Chinese authorities said was a "technical issue." The three Queensland meatworks were Kilcoy Pastoral Company, the JBS-owned Beef City, near the Queensland Darling Downs, and Dinmore near Brisbane. The NSW company was the Northern Cooperative Meat Company, in Casino. Interestingly, the Kilcoy Pastoral Company is controlled by one of China's biggest private agribusinesses, New Hope Group. In 2015, Kilcoy became part of Kilcoy Global Foods, an international conglomerate with largely Chinese backing. The news sent shockwaves through Australia's beef industry, given Australia's beef export trade jumped to $2.87 billion last year, from $1.37 billion in 2018. Chinese demand accounted for almost 25 per cent of Australian beef exports last year. There have been suggestions the suspensions placed on the four abattoirs were retribution for Australia's role in calling for an independent review into the origins of, and China's response to, the COVID-19 outbreak. Both Trade Minister Simon Birmingham and Agriculture Minister David Littleproud have denied any suggestion the move is linked to Australia's call for an inquiry. "Let me just put into perspective, one of those abattoirs is in fact partially Chinese-owned, so they've imposed this temporary ban on one of their own companies here in Australia," Mr Littleproud said earlier this week. "So I think we just need to take a calm look at these and look at them individually and make determinations from that." It's not just the beef industry that is worried. Australia's dairy industry is also watching the trade crackdown. But any moves to expand the trade restrictions to dairy products could impact Chinese-backed Australian exporters. Over the past five years, Greater China (China, Hong Kong, and Macau) has been one of the fastest-growing export markets for Australia's dairy industry. In 2018-19, it accounted for 30 per cent of Australia's dairy exports by volume (worth $1 billion), with Japan in second place with 12 per cent (worth $550 million). The Morrison Government seems to be betting that all it needs to do is hold its nerve and hold the line when it comes to China's trade threats. It is the single-largest export market for a range of Australia's dairy goods: liquid milk, milk powder, butter, even live dairy cows. With Chinese consumers becoming increasingly attracted to Australia's safe and healthy dairy products, Chinese businesses have shown a keen interest in local milk producers and dairy farms. After the 2008 baby formula scandal in China, which left as many as 300,000 infants sick and six dead, Chinese consumers turned to local manufacturers of infant formula, such as A2 and Bellamy's Australia, with sales surging to China through informal "Daigou" shopping channels. And last year, Bellamy's Australia  one of Australia's largest manufacturers of baby formula  was sold to Chinese dairy giant Mengniu for $1.5 billion. Mengniu is part-owned by the Chinese Government's China National Cereals, Oil and Foodstuffs Corporation. Mengniu also recently paid $600 million for Lion's dairy division, which includes brands under licence: Dairy Farmers, Masters and Pura milk; Big M, Dairy Farmers and Pura Classic flavoured milk; Dare and Farmers Union iced coffee; Vitasoy soy milk and coconut milk; and juice brands Daily Juice, The Juice Brothers and Berri; and Yoplait yoghurt. In 2016, Mengniu bought a 79 per cent stake in Burra Foods, one of Victoria's major dairy processors. Also in 2016, then-treasurer Scott Morrison approved the sale of Tasmanian-based dairy business Van Dieman's Land Company (VDL) to Chinese company Moon Lake for $280 million. At the time, Moon Lake outlined a plan to transport fresh milk directly from Tasmania to China on weekly flights, but by June last year no such flights had occurred. As the Chinese middle class has expanded, its taste for foreign wine has grown. China is now the world's third-largest market for imported wine, behind the United States and Germany. According to the Australian Trade and Investment Commission, Australia is the second-largest wine supplier to China after France. To put that in perspective, in 2019 Chinese wine export pioneer Warren Randall said Australian wine exports had grown from 1 million litres a year in 1997 to more than 150 million litres a year by 2019. Last year, Australian exports of wine to China reached a record $1.25 billion, an increase of 18 per cent in 12 months  almost half of the total value of Australia's $2.89 billion global wine exports. The growth of the wine market has seen Australian industry figures report growing investor interest from China in Australian vineyards. However, as with other industries, there is no publicly available list of the level of Chinese ownership in Australia's wineries. In 2018, China state media reported the country's largest wine producer, Yantai Changyu Pioneer Wine Co, bought an 80 per cent stake in Kilikanoon Estate of Adelaide, for $20.6 million, to help meet Chinese consumers' demand for wine. It said roughly 10 per cent of Kilikanoon's total output was sold to China, but that figure was expected to reach 50 per cent as production increased. By 2018, it was estimated Chinese-backed investors owned up to 10 per cent of South Australia's famous Barossa Valley winemaking region. One of those companies was Chateau Yaldara, bought by businessman Arthur Wang in 2014 for $15.5 million. Mr Wang also owns another Barossa Valley winery, 1847 Wines, which he purchased in 2010. Max's Vineyard was sold in 2018 to a Chinese-backed investor for just over $3 million, while Cimicky Wines sold for $6.6 million. In the same year, one of Australia's biggest wine industry investments in 10 years came from Weilong Wine Grape Company, which raised $120 million through a share placement to build a winery in Mildura, Victoria. Other agribusiness projects with Chinese backing include the 93,000-hectare cotton giant Cubbie Station on the Queensland-NSW border. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Agribusiness is one of the most nervous sectors watching relations sour between Beijing and Canberra. But it's not the only one. As with agribusiness though, restrictions on Australian exports across a wider range of sectors could also impact Chinese interests. This week, for instance, China revised customs rules for its iron ore imports, which prompted concern for the future of Australia's biggest export. China currently relies on Australia for two thirds of its iron ore demand to satisfy its insatiable need for steel. Years ago, it was that need for steel that prompted its investment in one of Australia's biggest mining companies, Fortescue Metals. In 2009, Hunan Valin bought into Fortescue, then Australia's third-biggest iron ore producer, for $US771 million. It has since sold down its stake, but it still has an interest in the company. Australia's coal industry has been targeted in the past by Chinese officials wanting to send a message to Canberra. Australian grain farmers have stopped sowing barley mid-stream in some paddocks as they brace for lower prices and the prospect of losing a major market in a brewing trade storm. Last year, Australian coal shipments were made to wait at Chinese ports while solutions were found through diplomatic channels over a flare-up in Sino-Australian relations. Any move against Australia's coal industry risks hurting Chinese financial interests. A major player in Australia's coal industry is Yancoal Australia, controlled by Chinese state-owned enterprise Yankuang Group. It is one of Australia's largest global thermal coal exporters, with China a key market. Trade tensions with China are not new. In recent years, Australia has walked an increasingly difficult tight-rope between economic and national interests. However, China's position as a developing nation means it is just as reliant on imports of Australian agricultural and mining products as Australia's export industry is reliant on China. Earlier this month, Prime Minister Scott Morrison said while Australia works "every day on our relationship with China" it also paid to remember it was "a mutually beneficial partnership." "And within that partnership, there are issues that need to be addressed from time to time," he said. "One of the most important things about our approach to the relationship is we're always consistent, we draw very clear lines about things that are important to us, as does the Chinese Government, and we respect their lines as we expect our lines to be respected." 
Australia has banded with the United Kingdom and Canada in describing China's plan to impose a strict national security law on Hong Kong as deeply concerning and undermining the city's autonomy. Beijing wants to introduce the legislation that would expand its ability to monitor and oversee Hong Kong's security operations and target people seeking to undermine China's authority. The proposal was raised at China's National Congress and follows the widespread protests by Hong Kong residents concerned Beijing was undermining the freedoms promised when the city was handed back to China by the UK in 1997. Australia's Foreign Minister Marise Payne, British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab and Canadian Foreign Minister Francois-Philippe Champagne have issued a statement critical of China's plan. For two decades, Beijing has been frustrated by opposition to security laws in Hong Kong. But Xi Jinping is now convinced winning local support is futile, writes Bill Birtles. "The legally binding Joint Declaration, signed by China and the United Kingdom, sets out that Hong Kong will have a high degree of autonomy," the three ministers said. "It also provides that rights and freedoms, including those of the person, of the press, of assembly, of association and others, will be ensured by law in Hong Kong and that the provisions of the two United Nations covenants on human rights  shall remain in force." The trio suggested it could be a power grab. "Making such a law on Hong Kong's behalf, without the direct participation of its people, legislature or judiciary, would clearly undermine the principle of 'One Country, Two Systems', under which Hong Kong is guaranteed a high degree of autonomy," the ministers said. Chinese officials say they may directly set up special offices in Hong Kong to oversee the city's national security efforts in the wake of last year's pro-democracy unrest. When Britain handed Hong Kong back to China in 1997, remaining citizens were promised British capitalism and laws. In the intervening years, some argue that Beijing has squandered its promises. A state-controlled news agency accused the city's pro-democracy opposition of having "schemed with external forces in attempts to create a 'colour revolution'". Beijing has repeatedly alleged that the pro-democracy camp was receiving support from the CIA in the United States, as well as other foreign governments. A Chinese official said the National Congress was exercising its "constitutional power" to set up a new legal framework and enforcement mechanism to ensure national security in Hong Kong. Activists say the new laws could be a knockout blow for Hong Kong's one country, two systems deal with China. 
CoronaCheck is RMIT ABC Fact Checks regular email newsletter dedicated to fighting the misinformation infodemic surrounding the coronavirus outbreak. You can read the latest edition below, and subscribe to have the next newsletter delivered straight to your inbox. A couple of weeks ago we reported a story on Clive Palmer and his claimthat the use of the drug hydroxychloroquine had been a major factor in the Australia's low number of COVID-19 deaths. He made that claim after announcing he'd bought 33 million doses of the drug to donate to Australia's medical stockpile. We've now fact checked that claim, and found itto be baseless. We've also looked at a claim made by Agriculture Minister David Littleproud that Australia has the "most secure food security in the world". We found that claimto be in the ballpark. Also investigated by us this week: a Facebook post attributed to the Department of Health claims common coronavirus tests can't distinguish COVID-19 from other illnesses. The Department told us that was incorrect. A postshared widely on Facebookand attributed to the Department of Health claims that tests for the novel coronavirus, known as SARS-COV-2, are not able to distinguish the virus from other illnesses. "It should be noted that PCR tests cannot distinguish between "live" virus and non-infective RNA,"the post states. "This means the test cannot [distinguish] covid from a cold or measles or ebola." As Australian Medical Association ACT President Antonio Di Dio explained to the ABCin March, Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) tests are the most widely used COVID-19 tests in Australia, and work by taking a "fingerprint" of RNA from a patient. "In the context of COVID-19, you get a piece of the RNA from a swab of the patient, you double it, then again and again,"Dr Di Dio said. "Until you have millions of copies." Within a few hours, the sample would be large enough to see whether COVID-19 is present. A caption alongside the Facebook post claims the information has been taken "from [the Department of Healths] own website". In a statement, a department spokesman told RMIT ABC Fact Check the post contained "selectively chosen information taken out of context" from afactsheet for clinicians, along with "complete inaccuracies". "The factsheet is actually dealing with COVID-19 positive people continuing to test positive after the infectious period has passed,"the spokesman said. "It is true that the PCR may still result in a positive test, because of remaining non-infectious viral load within the patient." He said the test would not detect any pathogen other than the SARS-COV-2 virus. Touted by some as a miracle cure for COVID-19, the anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine was thrust into the spotlight again this week when US President Donald Trumprevealedhe was taking it to avoid contracting the illness. Billionaire businessman Clive Palmer says Australia has given credit to hydroxychloroquine for Australia's low coronavirus death rate. The drug recently made headlines in Australia when outspoken businessman Clive Palmer donated almost 33 million doses reportedlymore than the equivalent of entire US stocks  to Australias national medical stockpile. In a series of newspaper ads and TV interviews, Mr Palmer claimed hydroxychloroquine was behind Australias low mortality rate, which he said had fallen since the drug was made available to treat hospitalised coronavirus patients in early April. But can Australias success be linked to the drug?Fact Check asked the experts andfound Mr Palmers claim to be baseless. In fact, the drug was already available to hospital patients, and experts said the death curve had flattened because just a few weeks earlier the case curve had done the same. The jury is still out on whether the drug works as a treatment for COVID-19. However, the evidence isn't promising. Given the known risks of hydroxychloroquine, Australia's medicines regulatory body strongly advises against giving it to coronavirus patients in the absence of positive clinical trial results. It feels like ancient history, but for a time, just a few short weeks ago, supermarket shelves normally filled with toilet paper, pasta, flour and cleaning supplies were bare and the Prime Minister labelled the apparent cause, panic buying, "ridiculous" and "not sensible". Agriculture Minister David Littleproud says that Australia has "the most secure food security in the world". Despite those scenes, federal Agriculture Minister David Littleproud recently declared that Australia had "the most secure food security in the world". "We're a nation of 25 million people," Mr LittleproudtoldABC Radio National's Afternoon Briefing program on May 11. "We produce enough food for 75 million." In afact check published earlier this week, we found that claim to be in the ballpark. Many studies and experts say Australia enjoys a very high level of food security, exports far more than it needs and has ample alternative sources of certain foods should they become scarce. In terms of Australia's international ranking, we're not quite the most food secure nation but one comparison places us 12th among 113 countriesin terms of food security. NewsGuard, a self-described "internet trust tool", has published a listof Twitter "super spreaders"  accounts that "repeat, share and amplify" coronavirus misinformation and myths to large numbers of followers. The 10 accounts listed by NewsGuard reach a combined 3.3 million followers and have continued to publish misinformation despite Twitterannouncinga crackdown on March 18 in a bid to address the so-called "infodemic". Included in the list are the accounts of former Nigerian politician Femi Fani-Kayode, conservative radio commentator Bill Mitchell and former British footballer David Icke. The accounts have propagated myths including that COVID-19 does not exist and that zinc or herbal remedies can prevent or cure the virus, and are spreading unproven claims about the effect of 5G technology on the virus. Misinformation about Bill Gates and his involvement in global public health seems to spread exponentially with each passing day, with the billionaire tech founder and philanthropist the alleged 'villain'in a number of convoluted coronavirus conspiracy theories. This week, fact checkers atIndia Todayfound that a photo of Mr Gates and top US infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci apparently flaunting social distancing and face mask rules was taken in December 2018, long before the coronavirus outbreak. Another claim linking the men, which suggested that Dr Fauci served on Microsofts board of directors, was found to be false byAP Fact Check. Though not related to the coronavirus, a rumour has also been spread online that Mr Gates visited disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein's private island multiple times. That claim, too, is false, according toReuters. Meanwhile,Politifactfound that the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation was not set to make a profit from the development of a coronavirus vaccine, whileReutersfound that Mr Gates did not present to the Pentagon a plan to immunise religious fanatics. Speaking of religion,Reutersalso found Mr Gates had not advocated for the permanent banning of religious gatherings. Melinda Gates has also been the victim of online rumours, including a claim, debunked bySnopes, that she wore a satanic symbol during a TV interview. US President Donald Trump this week claimed that he had been taking hydroxychloroquine as a COVID-19 preventative, prompting scorn from political adversaries including House of Representatives Speaker Nancy Pelosi, a Democrat. "He's our president, and I would rather he not be taking something that has not been approved by the scientists, especially in his age group and, shall we say, his weight group,[which] is morbidly obese, they say,"Ms Pelositold CNN. While her comments weremet with gleeby some, othershave accused her of"fat shaming". But was her comment accurate? Not quite, according to fact checkers atPolitiFact, who found that based on figures from Mr Trump's latest physical examination he would not be considered "morbidly obese"bymedical standards. Weighing in at 243 pounds (110 kilograms) and measuring 6 feet 3 inches (191 centimetres), Mr Trump just falls into the obese category. And while some pundits have questioned the official height and weight figures provided by Mr Trump, PolitiFact found that he would need to be shorter than 5 feet 8 inches (173 centimetres) and weigh 260 pounds (118 kilograms) to be classified"morbidly obese". Got a fact that needs checking? Tweet us@ABCFactCheckor send us an email atfactcheck@rmit.edu.au 
Uncertainty has been one of the most challenging hallmarks of COVID-19 for Year 12 student Olivia Condon. During the hours spent in online lessons, the 17-year-old found it impossible to stop her mind from worrying about the future. "I felt really anxious, thinking 'Am I going to get a bad mark, when are we going back to school?'," she said. "My mind was constantly asking questions I couldn't answer." She is one of thousands of high school students across the country dealing with a global pandemic while preparing for the most important exams of their young lives. Youth workers say instances of self-harm and suicidal thoughts have risen significantly among young people in recent months. While some students have remained resilient, the upheaval has prompted calls for education providers to focus more on wellbeing than marks. For Olivia, the low point came shortly after she stopped going to classes in early April. "It was really hard to keep doing work because stress just kept piling up and you didn't get a break, you were stressed but you still had to do the work," she said. She also worried about classmates with difficult home lives. "The only thing that kept them going was school and seeing their friends, so COVID had such a negative impact for them," she said. The coronavirus outbreak has caused an unprecedented increase in demand for mental health support services for young people. The Kids Helpline reported a 40 per cent rise in demand for counselling services in March. Project Youth supports at-risk young people in Sydney's south with crisis accommodation, employment, and respite from troubles at home. Operations manager Kevin Crowe said the amount of young people needing assistance had never been greater, with referrals coming from as far away as Victoria. "It's been a nightmare to be honest," he said. "We've had a big increase in anxiety and depression  suicidal ideation and self-harming. "We've had an increase in referrals, especially for kids under 16 who are not able to stay at home  it's quite frightening actually."  Despite efforts to provide online tutoring, Mr Crowe said many students trying to complete their secondary education will drop out due to complications caused by COVID-19. "They're falling through the gaps, which is very sad," he said.  It's an escalation that did not surprise Will Stubley from Year 13, an organisation that helps young people transition from school to adult life. In recent months, his staff have been inundated with concerned students looking for clarity in their final year. Mr Stubley said the focus on academia in the final years of high school forced an unhealthy amount of pressure onto young people. "Adding COVID on top, it's just not healthy  that stress and anxiety is not necessarily warranted," he said. Despite the upheaval, there are signs that students are learning to better support each other. Year 12 student Jakub Kamen said the time away from school had taught him the value of reaching out to those who were struggling. "I definitely noticed more people have been down in the dumps, so I would check on a few people, ask how they were going," he said. "You've got to make sure people around you are OK and let them know you're there for them." Olivia said she had also been more emotionally open with her classmates. "Since being at home I've found it so important to check up on people, even if you didn't talk to them much before," she said. "It's been a positive response, I've made friends with people I wouldn't necessarily be close with before." It was a pleasing response for Mr Stubley, who hoped that COVID-19 shutdowns would reinforce the importance of student welfare over marks. "School helps young people become an independent contributor to society and that has come much more to the fore now," he said. "The emphasis has shifted to 'How can we help these young people navigate the period after school?' "That should be the focus anyway." 
Queenslanders don't like being told what to do, especially by their southern neighbours. So it's no surprise we saw a terse and frustrated Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk hit back at pressure from New South Wales leader Gladys Berejiklian to reopen the border  citing NSW's more than 300 active coronavirus cases, compared to Queensland's 12. Latest information from Queensland Health. Ms Palaszczuk has repeatedly said she based her decisions on medical advice to stop NSW and Victorian travellers bringing the illness to the Sunshine State. It seems border closures are far less useful when you're a net exporter of the virus, compared to a net importer. The Premier's choices have been wedged in a tighter political position than usual, with Queensland's October state election creeping closer. Opponents have argued the economic fallout of the pandemic would be extenuated by the border shut-down and commentators suggest the Premier has backed herself into a corner that will result in polling pain.  Ms Palaszczuk has taken the position there could be unspeakable damage to the economy, perhaps irreversible, if a second wave were to enter from southern states through opened borders. And Labor knows, at the moment, it has the political capital on its side, especially in must-win regional areas. There's a shared opinion among some regional communities on the reluctance to wind back a restriction that kept areas completely COVID-19-free. Carpentaria Mayor Jack Bawden seconded the Premier's hard-line border stance. "We should keep them closed  the further we can keep this bloody virus away from the community, the happier we are," Cr Bawden said. Diamantina Mayor Rob Dare fell in line with the general consensus backing Ms Palaszczuk's southern shutdown. "I agree with her  it seems to be all the cases are in New South Wales and Victoria, so I agree with her stance at the moment," Cr Dare said. Even Gold Coast Mayor Tom Tate, who is an advocate for large parts of the tourism industry that have been savaged by coronavirus, has publicly endorsed the stand. And it's not like Queensland's isolation attempt is different from many other states, including locked-up South Australia, Western Australia, Northern Territory and Tasmania, which all have closed borders. Two recent Queensland cases have spooked authorities, who know how easily the hard work could be undone. The Rockhampton nurse whose actions had the potential to  and still could  cause a mass outbreak amongst our most vulnerable, and another case from this week of a woman who was diagnosed with the virus two months after returning from India. Both cases reinforce how tenuous Queensland's hold is on the situation. And it was just two months ago when Queensland was on the precipice of a catastrophic explosion and COVID-19 case numbers were doubling every three days. In the words of Queensland's Chief Health Officer Jeannette Young, it was terrifying. Now that cases have dramatically slowed here, at least one Opposition MP used State Parliament to proclaim "the worst has passed" in their pursuit of relaxing the lockdown measures. But health leaders have been at pains to explain the curve hasn't flattened in Queensland because the virus is gone  it's simply that it's not being spread because of the stringent restrictions. Some LNP insiders admit their regions are expressing the desire to keep our southern neighbours locked out  at least for now. So why has the top tier of the LNP used its public time this week to criticise the Government's decision? The usual political playbook reads that when the Government says something is black, the Opposition claims it's white. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. But over the pandemic months, we've mostly seen a departure from the usual script, to present one united team  locally and nationally. Now, as the days dwindle down towards the election, that cooperative veneer is slipping. LNP Opposition Leader Deb Frecklington, while criticising the Government's decision, also said she would listen to the health advice. It's a pretty glaring contradiction from the LNP that indicates there's little room for unity politics in an election campaign. There is, of course, a risk the sentiment could turn against the Premier as the days of few coronavirus cases continue. But it's plainly irrational the Premier would persist with border closures if they weren't absolutely essential. And Ms Palaszczuk would be banking on the wider support of Queenslanders to back her over her southern counterpart. 
One of Australia's major banks has offered relief to thousands of property investors who hold interest-only home loans, responding to claims the industry is not doing enough to stave off a potential property crisis. Westpac has pledged to extend borrowers' interest-only periods after WA Senator Dean Smith criticised the industry for failing to support landlords, many of whom are self-funded retirees, who were struggling with higher repayments due to their loans switching to principal and interest. Senator Smith said he would canvas support for a Senate inquiry into the banks' treatment of property investors after hearing disturbing stories of financial hardship. He said he feared investors pushed to the wall could lead to a worst-case scenario of a "tsunami of forced sales". Westpac has now confirmed borrowers can apply to extend the interest-only periods of their loans for up to a year, instead of being forced to start paying the principal of their loans when it expires. "This includes allowing interest-only customers to extend their loan term for up to 12 months or customers on principal and interest repayments to switch to interest-only repayments for the same period," Will Ranken, Westpac's general manager of home ownership, said. "We recognise that COVID-19 has had a significant impact on household finances and these changes will provide affected customers with more flexibility with their home loan repayments during this time." For Adelaide couple Dianne and Brian McShane, whose loans are with a different bank, Westpac's statement offered little hope. The self-funded retirees were already struggling with their loan repayments before coronavirus hit and now their tenants on the Gold Coast have had to break their lease due to the pandemic. Ms McShane, a former administrative assistant, and her husband, an ex-electrician, started investing in property 20 years ago to try to fund their retirement. They currently have three investment properties, two in Queensland and one in Western Australia. But instead of earning an income from them, the couple in their 60s are paying $9,000 a month to the bank to cover their loans, which switched from interest-only to principal and interest last year. Mr McShane said the couple were running out of funds and would ultimately be forced to sell in the falling housing market. "There will come a day when we are going to run out of money because we are paying all this principal and we'll have to sell everything, and we'll have nothing left," he said. "And we'll have to rely on the pension. "And that's the reason why we invested in property  we didn't want to be a burden." The couple said they asked their bank 12 months ago if they could retain their interest-only terms, but that their application was rejected because they were no longer in the workforce.  They said the bank rang them earlier this week to indicate that they could apply for a new loan, but the pair had little confidence that it will be approved. Sydney investor Mike Scotland, a former school teacher, owes $1.1 million to the banks and is in a similar predicament. Mr Scotland has six investment properties and all the loans have switched to principal and interest. "The rationale was that there is no way to gain wealth in Australia unless you invent a better mousetrap, win the lottery, have a brilliant business or maybe you do a bit of investment," he said. "People think property investors are multi-millionaires but probably about 40 per cent of them never make a profit. "They're not rich, fat cats, they're just people trying to get ahead for the most part." Mr Scotland said all of his properties had either fallen in value or flat-lined, while rents had also dropped. He envisaged he would have to sell in eight or nine months' time, at a loss. "So I'm heading towards a deadline, I'm heading towards a cliff," he said. "The banks are putting a lot of pressure on the economy, that's really the situation." Westpac's policy is in line with recent advice from the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) that the banks could extend interest-only terms during the COVID-19 pandemic and it would not trigger responsible lending obligations. Chief economist with REA group Nerida Conisbee said property investors would be most affected by the COVID downturn because of the impact on the rental market from job losses. But she said it was in the banks' interests to support their customers through the difficult times.  "I can't see it happening that the banks would allow wholesale default of loans or wholesale distress in the property market by forcing people to sell to pay back debt," she said. "The banks are well capitalised. "It is not in their interest for people to start defaulting on loans or sell their properties at a loss." Ms Conisbee said crunch time for the housing market would come when borrowers, including investors, reached the end of the leniency period for mortgage deferrals the banks had introduced. "The big concern now is what happens after that six months," she said. Banking analyst Brett Le Mesurier said the banks had already offered considerable relief to mortgagees, granting relief from paying interest. "It is not like they are taking a hard approach to their customers," he said. "They are actually taking the most sympathetic approach they have ever taken, but of course there are obviously examples that this Senator is aware of where customers are not getting the sort of relief from the major banks that others are. "The danger for the banks granting a lot of relief to people is that you are just creating more problems for the future." NAB issued a statement saying it had a team contacting customers approaching the end of their interest-only terms to work with them on the "right solution, which can include restructuring a loan if required". This included a fast-tracked process for customers with interest-only loans due to expire in the next six months to extend their interest-only period for a year, but this would not apply to borrowers who had reached their maximum interest-only term.   ANZ did not respond to the question of extending interest-only loan periods but said customers could request a repayment deferral on their home loan for up to six months and this included investors paying interest only. The bank said 105-thousand home loan customers had sought assistance. Senator Dean Smith said he welcomed the prospect of more flexibility by the banks, providing the application process for borrowers was not onerous, and requests for extensions were actually granted. "It's encouraging to see one of Australia's major lending institutions change its policy towards the extension of interest-only loans, but these changes now need to be made industry-wide," he said. "I again call on the entire Australian banking and finance sector to extend interest-only loan repayments until the pandemic's financial fallout has passed." 
Half the workforce is now receiving either the JobSeeker or JobKeeper payment. The Australian Government is pumping more cash into the economy as a percentage of GDP than nearly any other country.  And now Josh Frydenberg has declared "there is no money tree". It may sound like an odd declaration from a Treasurer who had no problem whistling up hundreds of billions of dollars in a matter of weeks, but the point Frydenberg is trying to make is that the spending cannot continue. When six months of support payments are up, that's it. The Government will go no further. It will then rely on the Coalition's cupboard of policy "principles and values" to shift nearly 7 million Australians from support payments back into sustainable jobs. Just before he coughed up a lung at the dispatch box on Tuesday, the Treasurer spoke of the "proven path" for growing the economy.  "The values and the principles that have guided Coalition reforms in the past must guide us again in the future," Frydenberg said, listing tax and workplace reform, cutting red tape and upskilling as sure-fire ways to generate some growth. It's too early to know where the Government will land on the specifics here, but perhaps we should look at the Coalition's reform legacy as a guide, given the Treasurer's invitation to do so. The reform record is a patchy one, with a few unhappy memories many on the Coalition side would no doubt rather forget. There were the attempts to deregulate university fees, introduce a GP co-payment, establish a National Energy Guarantee and cut the company tax rate for big business. Each of these ideas bit the dust in the face of internal or opposition resistance.  On other fronts the Coalition has had more success: trimming superannuation perks, cutting income taxes and lowering company tax for smaller firms. In different ways, these successful and unsuccessful measures all involved a smaller role for government.  It's no coincidence that the Prime Minister now talks about a "business-led recovery" rather than a government one. The Coalition hasn't always been able to get its way, but it's maintained a consistent principle of looking for a smaller role for the state. The past few months have been quite the anomaly. The Government is now playing a far bigger role in the economy than ever before, but as it eyes the recovery, the Prime Minister and Treasurer want it known the various support payments for workers, the unemployed, childcare services, pensioners and apprentices are only temporary. By contrast, Anthony Albanese sees an ongoing need for big government, warning against the "law of the jungle and unfettered market forces" as Australia charts its path to recovery.  In a speech to caucus on Monday, the Labor leader pointed to the ALP's "values of fairness, security and the power of government to change lives" as the best way forward. So what reform ideas have these Labor values produced in recent years? We've seen ambitious plans to super-charge spending on education, health, dental care and childcare. All of this was to be paid for by stripping back negative gearing and franking credit tax breaks and increasing tax on the highest income earners.  The problem is, voters didn't like it. At least not enough to stop them punishing Labor with three consecutive election defeats. Since becoming Opposition Leader 12 months ago, Anthony Albanese has been contemplating how to adjust Labor's policy mix. He's been criticised for moving too slowly, but it's probably a good thing he didn't settle on any fixed positions before the game-changing COVID crisis came along.  Now he has an opportunity to weigh up what the post-COVID economy needs and what voters want. It's still far too early to know exactly what the economy will look like as restrictions are eased; which businesses will be viable, what might happen to the global economy and whether the trade relationship with China will recover or continue to deteriorate.  Specific reform proposals are unlikely to emerge from either side until the lay of the land is clearer. Right now, we have competing "values". The Coalition wants a business-led recovery, Labor prefers an ongoing government-led path to growth. The Eden-Monaro by-election may provide some clues as to whether voters have a preference. David Speers is the host of Insiders, which airs on ABC TV at 9am on Sunday or on iview. 
The Northern Territory has continued to ease its tough COVID-19 restrictions  allowing pubs, gyms, cafes and nail salons to reopen with extra hygiene measures and two-hour time limits in place. Darwin proprietor Jason Hanna owns several eateries across the Top End including The Deck Bar, Chow, Lazy Susan's and Good Times Bar & Grill. Mr Hanna has been up since 3:00am trying to get some of his restaurants ready to reopen at midday and expects Territorians to come out en masse to support local businesses and quench their thirst. "I think I might not have ordered enough beer [although] we've got buckets of corona on special all day, just to dig it in," he said. "We've got our poor brethren down in places like New South Wales that are allowed to have 10 people in a venue, here we can have 10 people on one table. "We are pretty blessed up here, the weather's 26C nice and cool, the beers flowing and the kitchens ready to go." Northern Territory Chief Minister Michael Gunner said he was excited about the 3,000 people who were back at work on Friday. Industry peak body Hospitality NT said about 450 food and drink venues reopened across the Territory, with more expected to open on June 5 in the third stage of restrictions easing. Mr Gunner thanked Territorians for listening to health advice and making the NT the "safest place in Australia". "It's been 53 days and I think you've all deserved that beer," he said.  Shenannigans, one of the bars on Darwin's popular drinking mile Mitchell Street, booked out completely by opening time at midday.  Sydneysider Charlotte Dubois was among the first to the bar. She said she'd been in Darwin six weeks and due to coronavirus, this was her first chance at a pint in the Top End town. "I can't wait to shove it in my Sydney friends' faces," she said. Bruce Masters said he finished up work early to be at the pub when it opened. "The beer always tastes good. But it's good to be out," he said.  "The plan for today is to enjoy socialising. "What the boss doesn't know doesn't hurt him." Lincoln Jenkins is the Northern Territory sales manager at Carlton and United Breweries.  Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Roughly 175,000 litres of beer have been delivered to the Northern Territory in the last week and Mr Jenkins assured Territorians there would definitely be enough tap beer to last the weekend.  "There will be plenty out there, we won't be running out," he said. "There's enough beer here for what we think is the next two to three weeks." Mr Jenkins said the NT was the "envy of the rest of the country" as pubs reopened and thousands of hospitality workers returned to work. While NT Police Commissioner Jamie Chalker said it was an "exciting day" for the Territory, but he also warned drivers to be safe on the roads.  Commissioner Chalker said there would be a strong police presence in busy centres and parks  and motorists could expect random breath tests. "We really don't want to see a spike in the road toll, and we certainly don't want to see a spike in poor road behaviour," he said.  "Just hit it with a little bit of common sense and appreciate the very rare circumstances we've been able to create in our own 'big bubble' and appreciate it and enjoy it but not risk it. NT Chief Health Officer Hugh Heggie, who joined Commissioner Chalker on a patrol down Mitchell St on Friday afternoon, said most people were doing the right thing.  "The pleasure though this time of the year, when Darwin is such a lovely place to be, and in a premises here, to see people, families, friends, work colleagues in their bubbles, social networks together," he said.  "I can see the enthusiasm and I hope people behave responsibly.  "Everything I've seen is just wonderful, premises and businesses have done this really well." 
The NBA is in talks with The Walt Disney Company on a single-site option for a resumption of play in Central Florida in late July, the clearest sign yet that the league believes the season can continue amid the coronavirus pandemic. The National Basketball Players Association is also part of the talks with Disney. Games would be held at the ESPN Wide World of Sports Complex, a massive campus on the Disney property near Orlando. NBA spokesman Mike Bass said the conversations were still "exploratory", and that the site would be used not only for games but for practices and housing as well. "Our priority continues to be the health and safety of all involved, and we are working with public health experts and government officials on a comprehensive set of guidelines to ensure that appropriate medical protocols and protections are in place," Bass said. The ESPN Wide World of Sports Complex is a 103-hectare campus with multiple arenas that could host games simultaneously and has been home to, among other things, the Junior NBA World Championship in recent years. ESPN is primarily owned by Disney, one of the NBA's broadcast partners. Space won't be an issue, even if Major League Soccer  which is also in talks to resume its season at Disney  is there at the same time as the NBA. Nearly 24,000 hotel rooms owned or operated by Disney are situated within the campus. The NBA suspended its season on March 11, becoming the first of the US major pro leagues to do so after it became known All-Star centre Rudy Gobert of the Utah Jazz tested positive for COVID-19. The list of NBA players known to test positive eventually grew to 10  not all were identified  and commissioner Adam Silver said last month the actual total was even higher. But the league has been working on countless return-to-play scenarios for several weeks, all with the caveat that testing would be an integral part of any resumption of the season. Teams have been allowed to welcome players back to their training facilities for voluntary sessions since May 8, and more than half of the league's franchises have taken advantage of that opportunity. The next steps would likely include a loosening of the restrictions for those voluntary workouts  no more than four players are currently allowed inside any facility at a time  and then a plan for when training camps could open. If the league plans to resume play in late July, then camps conceivably could open around the start of that month. AP 
The Australian share market has closed lower, dragged down by the major banks, but mining stocks have risen after iron ore exports contributed to a record trade surplus in March. The ASX 200 ended down by 0.4 per cent at 5,364 points, while the All Ordinaries index lost 0.3 per cent to 5,449. The major bank stocks all fell sharply, including Westpac (-2.3 per cent), NAB (-2.2 per cent), ANZ (-2.2 per cent) and Commonwealth Bank (-1.8 per cent). Energy stocks also weighed on the broader market, with falls for Oil Search (-2.7 per cent), Santos (-1.9 per cent) and Woodside (-1.4 per cent). Mining stocks lifted in afternoon trade, including BHP (+1.9 per cent) and Fortescue (+1.7 per cent), while Rio Tinto finished in the red (-0.6 per cent). It followed a surge in iron ore exports, which rose by around a third in March as some Chinese factories reopened. The Bureau of Statistics says Australia posted a record trade surplus in the month as exports rose while imports fell due to the coronavirus pandemic hitting global supply chains. Exports jumped by 15 per cent or just over $5.5 billion, seasonally adjusted, to $42.4 billion, with a rise in shipments of iron ore, coal, gold and meat. "We think some of the rise in iron ore exports reflects catch-up demand from the previous month, which saw a week of limited shipping activity due to Cyclone Damien," ANZ economists said. Services exports, such as tourism and education, dropped by 9 per cent or nearly $730 million. Income from travel dropped by $657 million, while income from travel-related services was down $734 million in the month. That was offset by a 4 per cent, or nearly $1.2 billion, fall in imports, in particular, travel and transport services. There was a also a drop in aircraft imports over the month, leaving a record trade surplus of $10.6 billion in March, an increase of $6.7 billion from February. The Australian dollar gained some ground, to about 64.4 US cents. Private employers in the US laid off a record 20.2 million workers last month as a forced shutdown of business to stem the COVID-19 outbreak savaged the economy. The ADP National Employment Report suggested that lockdowns in the US to slow the spread of the coronavirus could leave lasting scars on the economy. In addition, the figures for March were revised up to show private payrolls falling by 149,000 jobs over the month. That is instead of the previously reported 27,000 and is the first decline since September 2017. Chris Rupkey, chief economist at MUFG in New York, said the latest numbers indicated a deep economic downturn. "One thing for sure is that this pandemic health crisis has produced depression-magnitude job losses, which means this recovery is going to take longer than many are thinking," he said. "The Great Depression lasted three-and-a-half years, and it will be a miracle if the economy gets anywhere near back to normal within the next couple of years." More companies announced layoffs overnight, including ridesharing firm Uber, which plans to sack 3,700 employees. The cuts to its customer support and recruiting teams represent about 14 per cent of its nearly 27,000 employees. Uber chief executive Dara Khosrowshahi will also forgo his base salary for the rest of the year. His salary was $US1 million ($1.56 million) in 2019. Uber said the cost of redundancies would be around $US20 million. Mr Khosrowshahi said in a letter to staff that "days like this are brutal" and indicated there could be more job cuts to come. Rideshare rival Lyft announced a loss of $US398.1 million from sales of $US956 million, which was better than expected. The number of active users taking a Lyft trip fell over the first few months of 2020 compared to the last few months of 2019. Yesterday, accommodation sharing giant Airbnb announced that a quarter of its global workforce was being laid off. Meanwhile, another Amazon worker has died from coronavirus, according to CNBC. The employee, who worked at an Amazon warehouse in the US Mid-West, passed away on April 18 and his last day at the facility was on March 19. The death comes after Amazon warehouse employees raised concerns that the company was not doing enough to protect them from catching COVID-19 at work. As digital giants come under fire for misinformation about coronavirus on their platforms, Facebook has announced the first 20 members of its oversight board. The board is an independent body that can overturn the company's content moderation decisions. The members include former editor-in-chief of The Guardian newspaper Alan Rusbridger, retired judge and former European Court of Human Rights vice-president Andras Sajo, and law professor Nicolas Suzor from the Queensland University of Technology. On the markets, the Dow Jones index fell for first time in three days in a late sell-off on the job layoff news. The Dow lost 0.9 per cent to 23,665. The broader S&P 500 fell 0.7 per cent to 2,848.42 and the Nasdaq Composite added 45 points, or half a per cent, to 8,854. The US Treasury Department will launch a 20-year bond and increase securities auction sizes across a range of bonds to raise cash amid record US Government borrowing as it battles the coronavirus. Stocks in Europe ended mainly in the red, with Germany's DAX and the CAC 40 in France losing more than 1 per cent. The FTSE 100 index bucked the trend and rose 0.07 per cent to 5,854 as Prime Minister Boris Johnson said his Government was considering lifting some coronavirus restrictions as soon as Monday. West Texas crude oil dropped 2 per cent to $US24.05 a barrel. Spot gold fell below $US1,700 to nearly $US1,686 an ounce. 
The collective European economy will contract by 7.7 per cent and inflation in the eurozone will almost disappear this year because of the COVID-19 pandemic, the European Commission forecast on Wednesday. Public debt and budget deficits are also expected to balloon because of economic hardship brought on by the health crisis. "Europe is experiencing an economic shock without precedent since the Great Depression," European Commissioner for Economic and Financial Affairs Paolo Gentiloni said. "Both the depth of the recession and the strength of recovery will be uneven, conditioned by the speed at which lockdowns can be lifted, the importance of services like tourism in each economy and by each country's financial resources." The commission forecast that, as the economy contracts this year, consumer prices will almost stagnate.  The inflation rate will slow to 0.2 per cent in 2020, before accelerating to 1.1 per cent next year, when the eurozone returns to growth of 6.3 per cent. Investment will plunge 13.3 per cent this year, the forecast states. The effort to keep economies alive will boost budget deficits in the eurozone to an aggregate 8.5 per cent of GDP this year, from 0.6 per cent last year, before the gap shrinks to 3.5 per cent in 2021. Coronavirus questions answeredBreaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast.Read moreA surge in public debt, however, will take longer to undo, the commission said, forecasting that eurozone debt will jump to 102.7 per cent of GDP this year from 86 per cent last year. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Italy, Greece, Spain and Portugal will be among the hardest hit, while Luxembourg, Malta and Austria are to weather the shock better. Greek GDP is to contract the most, by 9.7 per cent, with Italy recording the second deepest recession of 9.5 per cent and Spain 9.4 per cent. The budget deficit of Italy, the EU country suffering the most deaths due to coronavirus, will also surge the most  to 11.1 per cent of GDP this year, from 1.6 per cent last year, before falling to 5.6 per cent in 2021, the commission forecast. Find out moreSpain's deficit will top 10 per cent this year, up from 2.8 per cent in 2019, with France close behind at 9.9 per cent. Italy's public debt will also record the biggest increase this year, to 158.9 per cent per cent of GDP, from 134.8 per cent in 2019.  Reuters 
Queensland will again ease COVID-19 contact restrictions from Mother's Day this Sunday to allow up to five members from one household to visit another home. "We don't think that will increase risk. It's about one household going to another household," Chief Medical Officer Jeannette Young said. But Dr Young urged people to maintain their distance when visiting other people and to avoid hugging or getting too close "wherever possible". "If you've got different households coming together, try to keep that social distance," she said. "So yes, when you go and visit, because we all want to keep our mums safe  I know I do  it's a good idea to just delay those hugs until we get through all this. "Within a household, of course hug each other but if you've got different households coming together, try and maintain that social distance, it's just being extra cautious but very appropriate." Multiple families can visit the same household as long as it is as different times. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said the easing of restrictions from Mother's Day was happening because "Queensland has been doing such a great job". "I really want to thank Queenslanders for a great job that they have been doing right across our state and I think this is going to be welcomed by families, especially on Mother's Day, starting this Sunday," Ms Palaszczuk said. Latest information from Queensland Health. Dr Young said the 50-kilometre limit on travel would also be lifted "if you're visiting another household". "But you can't go outinto that community. You can only goto that residence, visit there, andleave," Dr Young said.  Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "You can't go shopping, you can't go to the beach." Dr Young said there were two new cases of COVID-19 confirmed overnight, and that 4,665 Queenslander had been tested in the past 24 hours. Both new cases were on the Gold Coast, one of them linked to a cruise ship. Dr Young said Queensland only had 50 active cases, eight of whom were in hospital. She said despite a "few little breakouts" with the first easing of restrictions last weekend, people were getting the message. "All of these things are dependent on people hearing the message and continuing to do the great job they've done," Dr Young said. "If all of a sudden we end up with a lot of problems or a lot of cases, then we'd have to rethink, but I expect that won't happen. "This is all part of our strategy to get society, as much as possible, back to as much as it can do. "It won't be where we were pre-COVID, that won't happen for quite a while down the track, but we'll gradually see things moving back towards normal business". The Premier was due to meet with representatives from the hospitality industry on Thursday.  But she said a decision about reopening cafes, bars, restaurants and clubs would depend on advice from Friday's National Cabinet meeting. 
As the world grapples with an unprecedented health crisis, it is now more important than ever to ensure that the information we share is accurate and fact-based. Fake news and misinformation seem to be spreading as fast and as far as the virus itself, infecting our newsfeeds and timelines at this crucial moment. For this reason, RMIT ABC Fact Check has launched CoronaCheck, an email newsletter in which we will bring you the latest in fact-checking from around the world in relation to the coronavirus. You can read the latest edition below, and subscribe to have the next newsletter delivered straight to your inbox. Manyreaders have asked usaboutcommentssupposedlymade byNobel laureate Tasuku Honjo. We begin today's editionby setting the record straight on ProfessorHonjo'sstance on the source of the novel coronavirus. We've also turned our attention to Madagascar, where the country's president has been spruiking a herbal tea, and to France, where protective gowns that disintegrated when usedhad apparently been importedfrom China. Social media posts claiming that Nobel laureate Tasuku Honjo said the novel coronavirus was "not natural" and "manufactured in China" are false, according to fact checkers at AAP, AFP and Snopes. The posts quote Professor Honjo, who won the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine in 2018, as saying that the virus could not be natural, as it spreads in both hot and cold climates. "I have done 40 years of research on animals and viruses. It is not natural. It is manufactured and the virus is completely artificial," the posts allege Professor Honjo said. Fact checkers at AFP were unable to find any record of Professor Honjo making the attributed remarks, and the professor himself issued a statement saying he was "greatly saddened that my name and that of Kyoto University have been used to spread false accusations and misinformation". In Madagascar, the spread of coronavirus misinformation has not been confined to social media: even the country's leader is spruiking an unproven herbal remedy. According to the BBC, President Andry Rajoelina officially launched the herbal tea by claiming it had already cured two people in the country, prompting people to queue for their supply of the free beverage. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "This herbal tea gives results in seven days," Mr Rajoelina said. But the World Health Organisation told the BBC it did not recommend "self-medication with any medicines ... as a prevention or cure for COVID-19". According to a report in the Bangkok Times, authored by AFP, The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention noted: "There is no scientific evidence that any of these alternative remedies can prevent or cure the illness caused by COVID-19. In fact, some of them may not be safe to consume." With advice on when and where to wear a face mask varying widely, efforts to curb confusion are being further hindered by the spread online of misinformation about protective face coverings. One such example can be seen in a Facebook post, shared in a number of languages, purporting to show the effectiveness of face masks when worn by healthy and infected people, or a combination of both. The infographic claims a healthy person wearing a mask has a 70 per cent chance of being infected with the coronavirus by a sick person not wearing a mask. When mask-wearing is reversed, the apparent "contagion probability" falls to 5 per cent. When both healthy and sick people are fitted with masks, the chance of the healthy person of being infected is supposedly just 1 per cent. Fact checkers at Snopes and Reuters found that the information was mostly false, as there was no scientific consensus of the efficacy of face masks nor data to support the quoted percentages. It was also unclear whether the post referred to surgical masks, homemade masks or N95 respirator masks. However, as reported by Snopes, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention say that masks provided a way of "strengthening the social distancing that we are already doing". Fact checkers at Full Fact and factcheck.org have debunked a post shared on Facebook that falsely suggests a vaccine exists for the novel coronavirus. In the post, a caption accompanying the photo of a vaccine vial states: "Now this was 200 tell me why 19 years later they say there is no vaccine." However, the label on the vial clearly states "canine coronavirus vaccine". As is well known by now, coronaviruses are a family of viruses. The current outbreak relates to the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, which causes COVID-19. According to Full Fact, the vaccine shown in the photo is used to protect dogs from the canine coronavirus.  "Canine coronavirus doesnt affect people, and is a gastrointestinal disease, not a respiratory one," Full Fact explained. A video showing brand new medical gowns disintegrating in France has been shared with a misleading caption suggesting the faulty gear was made in China, AFP Fact Check has found. One version of the video, shared on Twitter and retweeted more than 250 times, is captioned: "Protect our doctors & nurses by not buying medical supplies from bloody #China!" But the hospital featured in the video told AFP that the gowns were not made in China. Rather, they were French-made gowns that had been damaged while in storage. "Apparently, the boxes were stored in a humid place, which damaged the overcoats inside," a spokesperson said. US President Donald Trump's recent claim that the US had done more testing for COVID-19 than "every country combined" has been rubished by fact checkers at factcheck.org. When Mr Trump made the claim on April 28, the US had carried out almost 6.03 million tests for the disease, more than any other country but not more than all other countries combined.  According to factcheck.org, more than 25 million tests had been administered outside the US. "So, [Mr] Trumps claim is not even close to being accurate," factcheck.org concluded. Meanwhile, the top US official in charge of testing, Admiral Brett Giroir, said that conducting 5 million COVID-19 tests per day was not feasible with the current technology. "There is absolutely no way on Earth, on this planet or any other planet, that we can do 20 million tests a day, or even five million tests a day," Time magazine reported the testing czar as saying. In its 56-page "roadmap" for a return to normalcy, a Harvard University study had suggested the US would need to conduct at least 5 million tests a day by early June, and 20 million per day by late July, something Giroir claimed was "an Ivory Tower, unreasonable benchmark". Got a fact that needs checking? Tweet us@ABCFactCheckor send us an email atfactcheck@rmit.edu.au 
NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian has warned the state's social-distancing shutdown will not be eased again before Mother's Day. Two of the new cases were at Newmarch House in Western Sydney The national cabinet will meet tomorrow and discuss relaxing restrictions, but Ms Berejiklian said: "I doubt that NSW will be in a position to implement anything before Mother's Day." While the national guidelines for coronavirus social-distancing could be changed tomorrow, Ms Berejiklian said NSW was "very different" to smaller states. "It's important for each state to work within those national guidelines and do what they think is within their state's interests," she said. The Premier said NSW already eased several restrictions this month and needed time to observe the "cumulative" effects of those changes. "We don't want to have a spike in cases that exceeds what we can manage," she said. "The reason we've adopted that approach is to make sure we get back to normal as soon as possible. "I suspect by the end of June, life will feel much more normal than it does now and even during May, life will feel much more normal." The Premier said two adults and their dependent children could visit a household on Mother's Day and several visits could be scheduled across a day. She also pointed to the fact that unlike Queensland and WA, NSW did not have a limit on travel distances and people in Sydney were permitted to make essential visits to regional areas. She said the "greatest gift" for mothers was for children to return to school next week. Health authorities in Australia's worst-affected coronavirus state also confirmed three new infections yesterday. NSW Health revealed a record 10,902 people had been tested for the virus in the 24 hours to 8:00pm. Two of the new infections were staff at Newmarch House in Western Sydney, which could have its licence revoked in light of its climbing death toll. Newmarch House this afternoon confirmed another staff member had tested positive in addition to the two cases announced this morning. Yesterday, Australia's Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission ordered the nursing home's operator, Anglicare, to appoint an external advisor to ensure it was meeting its regulatory obligations. Anglicare today appointed Andrew Kinkade to take on the role for three months. Mr Kinkade has extensive experience in aged care in Australia and the UK and has been contributing to sector-wide preparations and responses to COVID-19. There have been 16 COVID-19 deaths at Newmarch House. 
Several major Queensland tourism operators say talk of a 'trans-Tasman bubble' has given them a glimmer of hope that they will be able to get up and running and on the road to recovery. New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern attended Australia's national cabinet meeting on Tuesday with Scott Morrison, discussing the possibility of establishing the travel safe zone. While both leaders admitted it was "some time away", Queensland Tourism Industry Council's Daniel Gswind said it marked an important step in the industry's revival. "We want to make sure every step is taken to accelerate the pace of the state reopening," he said. "The tourism industry employs between 230,000 to 240,000 people and we're quite confident that at least 25 to 30 per cent of those jobs have been lost or suspended. "It is very tough for many and we are hanging on by our fingernails in most cases, so to see some revenue come back is absolutely critically important. "We've gone through a few pain thresholds already and I don't think there is much more the tourism operators can sustain. We've actually gone past a point of pain." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Visitors from New Zealand are becoming an increasingly large part of Queensland's tourism market, particularly for regional hotspots like the Sunshine, the Gold Coast, and the Fraser Coast. Last year New Zealand tourists contributed $600 million to the state's economy. Visit Sunshine Coast chief executive, Simon Latchford, said New Zealand visitors last year accounted for almost a quarter of all tourism dollars, and flights to the neighbouring country were set to expand before the pandemic. "New Zealand has always been, and will continue to be, an extraordinarily important market to us," he said. Mr Latchford said travel between Australia and New Zealand could not resume soon enough for struggling operators. "I don't want to speculate on when this will happen but  yesterday would be great, because clearly we need as much leisure and business action going as quickly as we possibly can," he said. Queensland Airports chief executive, Chris Mills, said the idea of international travel recommencing was providing a small amount of hope to struggling tourism industries.  "I think the sentiment was great. [New Zealand] is such a big market for the Gold Coast," he said. "From our perspective as soon as it's safe to open it up we want to see it fast tracked." The Sunshine State's borders have been closed for more than a month with no date set for them to reopen. Mr Gswind said while international and interstate travel was a vital part of Queensland's tourism market, recommencing travel within the state itself was also essential to the industry's recovery.  "We want to see overnight stays as well becoming a possibility," he said. "The Premier hasn't set a date [for when travel within Queensland will be permitted], but she has indicated that a bit more will be possible by the school holidays in June and we will be able to take advantage of what we have on our doorstep." Regional areas are concerned that even if the trans-Tasman bubble goes ahead, and borders reopen, hard-to-reach locations that most visitors would usually fly to will miss out all together with domestic airlines struggling to remain viable. "Our key priority is having flights that come in," Tourism Whitsunday chief executive Tash Wheeler said. "We are a regional area. Getting dispersal out of cities relies heavily on access and flights and we're looking at ways we can partner with trains and buses. "Access is going to be vital to our success." Mr Gswind said there may also be an upside for regional tourism following the pandemic. He anticipated COVID-19 could pave the way for a boost in sustainable tourism in regional Queensland as more people sought wide open spaces to maintain social distancing while travelling. "I think there is this demand for open space," he said. "Back to nature, back to family, and being together with friends  all of those aspects will contribute to a slightly different tourism future. "We are in a good position to meet the changing expectations of consumers post this COVID-19 crisis and I think we do have to turn the crisis into an opportunity." 
Poland's ruling party leader and a partner in the governing coalition announced an agreement late on Wednesday to postpone Sunday's presidential election, saying a new date will be chosen later. Jaroslaw Kaczynski, head of the ruling Law and Justice party, and Jaroslaw Gowin, leader of a small party in the conservative coalition, called their decision "a solution that will guarantee Poles the opportunity to participate in democratic elections". The May 10 date was set months ago, but the coronavirus pandemic and a government-ordered lockdown threw preparations for Sunday's election into disarray.  Bitter fighting between the conservative governing party and its political opponents kept them from agreeing on an alternative date.   Instead, the ruling party had sought to maintain the election schedule by making it a postal vote. But a disagreement between Kaczynski and Gowin had created a stalemate that had threatened to cause a larger political crisis. Their agreement suggests the crisis has been averted for now. Many in Poland voiced concerns that a postal vote organised on short notice might not be conducted property or even fairly. Nine former Polish prime ministers and presidents urged voters last month to boycott the ballot, claiming it could be unconstitutional. The group included Lech Walesa, who helped overthrow communism as head of the Solidarity trade union movement. Opinion polls at the end of April showed fewer than 30 per cent of Poles were likely to vote. AP/Reuters 
When the coronavirus pandemic began, Ali Lord decided the best place to be was her parents' cattle station in North Queensland. The London-based events planner packed up her laptop and made the 17-day commute  including a 14-day quarantine period  to the other side of the world. She is now working remotely for the foreseeable future. "I left London because my new visa got held up due to coronavirus, which meant that I couldn't work in London until that came through," Ms Lord said. "That time period is looking like two to three months." With more than 32,000 deaths due to COVID-19, the United Kingdom is one of Europe's worst impacted countries. "Being in lockdown in London wasn't too appealing," she said. "You're talking a small two-storey flat and you're allowed outside for 30 minutes a day for your exercise. "Seeing a city like London, to see streets empty, to see the CBD completely bare is something I hope I've never got to see again in my lifetime." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. After spending two weeks in quarantine at a hotel in Sydney, Ms Lord set up her office on Sutherland Station, near Richmond. Her skills have been put to good use on both sides of the world, with the 14 station staff unable to leave and the rodeos and horse races in the area cancelled. "North Queensland has a great reputation for having an incredibly fun social period," she said. "It's really important for our team here that we do have those social moments and it's not just about long days of work." Together with her mother, Kacie, Ms Lord has been running quiz nights and tennis tournaments with the staff, who all live together. "I come up with the ideas and she just puts them into action," Kacie Lord said. "Everybody jumps on board and helps with the cooking or rolling the tennis court." Kacie Lord is also the president of the local Richmond Field Days, a three-day event that has been cancelled due to the pandemic. "It's the biggest event in the Richmond district and it's an iconic event for the whole of the north," she said. "This event's been going for 35 years and nothing has ever stopped it before  no floods, no droughts." Ms Lord was hoping to bring the event back to its former glory next year. "This is my third year doing it and I'm just finding my feet," she said. By that time, Ali Lord is hoping to be back working with her colleagues in London. "I've got a few obstacles to overcome," she said. "But hopefully I'll go back to London for a year or two and then we'll see what happens." 
An 80-year-old woman who fell and broke her hip  stuck alone on the floor of her home for days  has been rescued by police after a member of Queensland's newly-formed coronavirus Care Army raised the alarm. Erika Freingruber feared she was going to die alone in her Beaudesert house, south of Brisbane, and believes she blacked out during parts of the ordeal. Police bodycam footage captured the moment officers kicked down her door after hearing Ms Freingruber calling for help. "I fell down," she told police officers once they were inside. Constable Max Gillet and Constable Glenn Engels offered Ms Freingruber apple juice as she was lying on the floor with a pillow under her head. Ms Freingruber is recovering in hospital after the fall late last month and was visited by her rescuers,who came with flowers in hand. "You're my lifesavers, my angels, not policemen, my angels," she told them.  "Can you imagine a week, nearly a week lying there, without help day and night? "Every doctor who came here said, 'You don't know how lucky you are that you are alive'. "If you wouldn't have come, I don't think I'd be sitting here." MsFreingruber believes she broke her hip when she stepped out of bed in the morning. She cannot remember exactly how long she was there but it was up to five days. "I don't know what happened, I must have fallen unconscious because there's some time I cannot account for." Constable Engels said welfare checks quite often don't end well and he was relieved to hear Ms Freingruber yell out for help. "To hear her call out was gold for us, we knew we were in a good position," he said. He hoped the story of her rescue inspires more people to sign up to be part of the Care Army. "And hopefully save more lives," he said. Concerns about Ms Freingruber were first raised by Care Army worker Paul Mahoney. The new organisation was set up by the State Government to help monitor the elderly and vulnerable during the pandemic. Mr Mahoney said he was worried after not hearing back from her in several days. "I had some concerns because when I spoke to Erika a few days before hand she had really been on the ball," he said. "We'd also had people talk to her  about fall alarms and possibly about her getting one. "She wanted a few days to think over it and when I [returned to work after two days off], I didn't find any notes that had been made about it, so I really was worried," he said. "It rang alarm bells because she'd been so mentally alert that I was worried this was out of the ordinary for her. "I rang her and couldn't contact her and then I also contacted her friend who had not been able to contact her either, so that's when I rang the police." Kate Jones, Minister in charge of the Care Army, thanked volunteers for helping. More than 28,000 volunteers have registered, receiving more than 13,000 calls for help. "When you contrast those images with the images that we've seen of the elderly in places like Italy, Spain and America, it just shows you this is Queensland's story and that Queensland cares," she said. "There would be people in our community that don't have that support and that is what the Care Army is all about." 
The Duke and Duchess of Sussex have thrown their celebrity power behind a campaign to bring food and learning resources to children and families struggling during the COVID-19 pandemic. A three-minute video was posted to the Instagram accounts of Save With Stories and Save the Children UK on Wednesday showing former US actor Meghan Markle reading a book to her son Archie Mountbatten-Windsor. The video showed Meghan sitting with Archie, who turned one the same day, on her lap and reading one of his favourite books, Duck! Rabbit!. Archie grabs at the pages and helps turn them during the reading.  Dad Harry, who filmed the short video, whoops and says "bravo" from behind the camera at the end. Save the Children UK has called for a Family Rescue Package to ensure families have the support they need during the coronavirus crisis. The charity wants bigger tax benefits and more relaxed restrictions around jobseeker payments for those with children. Archie's parents chose not to pose with their newborn outside London's Portland Hospital when he was born and decided against giving the baby a royal name. He accompanied his parents on a tour of Africa at the age of four months and was introduced to Archbishop Desmond Tutu, a Nobel Peace Prize winner. Harry and Meghan shocked many early this year with an announcement they intended to quit as senior royals and split their time between Britain and North America. The couple officially stepped down from royal duties at the end of March, saying they were giving up public funding and seeking financial independence. The family went from living in a cottage on the grounds of Windsor Castle, to Vancouver Island in Canada and then on to Los Angeles before lockdown measures commenced. AP 
A new player has emerged in Australia's live-export industry, with Australian Cattle Enterprises (ACE) today loading its maiden voyage out of the Townsville Port. The Darwin-based company might be new, but its founder and managing director Patrick Underwood, is a well-known name in the northern cattle industry and is the former general manager of exporting company, NACC. Speaking to ABC Rural as 4,500 steers and bulls were being prepared for ACE's first consignment to Vietnam, Mr Underwood said it was "a really proud moment". "I've been in the industry for a long time and [starting a company like this] is quite an onerous task, but this is the first shipment for ACE, a new venture, which started as a back-grounding business in northern Australia. "So it's been a big task, but I've had a lot of support from the wider industry and from the Australian government." Mr Underwood said like many businesses, the coronavirus pandemic had caused some "nervous moments" for the new company. "This ship was originally going on April 30, so we delayed it a week at the request of the importer [who was experiencing] slower sales and a two-week lock down in Vietnam. "We understand how important it is to get this right and comply with the regulations in place, both in Australia and overseas," He said finding staff to work on boats during the pandemic had been challenging for the entire live-export trade, but he was happy to have secured a workforce that included respected Australian vet, Dr Ross Ainsworth. "Dr Ainsworth is one of the most experienced vets in the industry and he has undertaken a 14-day self-isolation in Townsville to be allowed on the vessel," he said.  The cattle have all been sourced from Queensland and are being exported to Vietnam's largest importer of Australian livestock, Hoa Phat. The company has two shipments in May and another two planned for June and, according to Mr Underwood, the third shipment due out of Darwin would have buffalo on board as well. "We'll be operating out of northern Australia and we're starting with Vietnam, but we hope to be selling cattle to Indonesia and Malaysia," Mr Underwood said.  
A Mount Isa doctor is reporting supply issues obtaining influenza vaccines this year amidst a rise in demand due to COVID-19, but health authorities are denying a problem. Dr Michael Mbaogu from the Mount Isa Medical Centre said he has seen a "huge increase" in patients presenting for the flu vaccine.  The funded vaccine is available for anyone aged six months to five years, anyone over 65, pregnant women, Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander patients, and people with chronic medical conditions.  "The trouble is that the non-government funding flu vaccines for people nt in the above categories are scarce," Dr Mbaogu said.  Health Minister Steven Miles said this morning that he was aware of "sporadic" shortages in some regional areas.  He said anyone concerned should contact their pharmacist or doctor and ask to be informed when supplies arrive. Mount Isa pharmacist, Vashti Dobson, said she had been told not to expect vaccinations to be delivered before the end of June. "We have tried to order extra vaccines from our supplier, and basically there is a significant delay in receiving those," she said.  "Pre-orders were placed in November and we ordered based on how many people we vaccinated last year, then once there was an increased demand we tried to order additional vaccines in March. "At this stage we're still waiting on 160 vaccines." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Ms Dobson, who is the pharmacist in charge for two local pharmacies, said she does not think the 160 vaccines will fill the demand. "I would say that with the number of calls we're getting, not it won't be enough," she said.  "I think that because of the big media attention around getting a flu shot and the coronavirus situation, that people are concerned that they won't get their vaccination." Australian Medical Association (AMA) North Queensland Representative, Michael Clements, said Queensland Health was doing its best.  "I really can't fault Queensland Health to be honest, remembering that we place our orders for these flu vaccines," Dr Clements said.  "These orders were placed last year, there's only so much that we can do  we could have tempered the health message a little bit, saying 'get your flu vaccine as soon as you can' as opposed to saying 'you need to get it  get it now'." Dr Clements, who works in Karumba every month, said the private flu vaccines were a supply issue not a national shortage. "One of the other things that is effecting demand at the moment is we've seen a lot of companies  making the flu vaccine compulsory," he said. "That's actually adding to the demand for the private flu vaccine stock."  A Queensland Health spokesperson said there had been no issue delivering the government-funded vaccine under the National Immunisation Program to Mount Isa. As of May 6, more than 1.3 million doses of the NIP vaccine have been distributed across Queensland. The spokesperson said all other flu vaccines other than that government-funded program were supplies by private market, not Queensland Health.  "Queensland Health does not have oversight of the supply or availability of influenza vaccine in the private market," the spokesperson said. "However, we are aware that the Australian Government has sourced additional supplies of influenza vaccine, which is anticipated to be available in the private market from June 2020. "There have been no issues with delivering government funded National Immunisation Program influenza vaccine to Mt Isa.  "However, due to limited commercial transportation options, Queensland Health has experienced some difficulty in delivering government funded vaccines to the communities of Burketown and Karumba." 
South Australia has only recorded one new case of coronavirus in the past fortnight, and the state could be in the box seat to win the race to recovery. There's no denying the global pandemic will have ongoing health implications, especially before a vaccine is developed, but many are predicting the financial implications will last for many years. Just last week, South Australian Treasurer Rob Lucas said he was "horrified" at the inevitable debt the state would accrue over coming years, largely due to spending on coronavirus measures. South Australia is not alone: every state and territory has had increased spending on infrastructure and economic measures to keep people in jobs or subsidise wages for those who have lost work. Some states are expected to suffer more than others, but the news for South Australia has a silver lining. This is largely due to the fact that South Australia doesn't rely as heavily on the industries that are going to be hardest hit. Independent economist Saul Eslake said South Australia's potentially strong position was a "backhanded compliment" for the state  but something it should also attempt to capitalise on. Nationally, Australia saw a gross domestic product rate increase of 2.89 per cent in 2018-19, but South Australia's annual growth rate for the same year was only 1.34 per cent. Usually, having a lower growth rate isn't something to brag about  but, ironically, it could now be the very reason that South Australia might bounce back quicker. "Australia's record-breaking run of economic growth largely owed an awful lot to three things," Mr Eslake said. "Number one, rapid population growth fuelled by immigration. Number two, piggybacking on China's rapid economic growth, industrialisation, and urbanisation. "And three, the housing boom. "One of the reasons why South Australia lagged [behind] the rest of the country over this period was that it derived less benefit from each of these three things." In other words, South Australia's slower economic growth means the state was starting from a lower base, so it didn't have as far to fall. The housing market is likely to be one of the sectors that is hit the hardest, along with tourism. However, South Australia's property market is traditionally more stable than the market in most other states  which could be a significant factor in it bouncing back. "We are in a better position than other states. Our market is less reliant on foreign investment, it's less reliant on investor activity," said Andrew Shields, interim general manager of the Real Estate Institute of SA. "We've also come off two very good quarters of performance in the real estate market so that's definitely positioning us for a good recovery. "Being a conservative market puts us in a much stronger position." While the number of new listings has inevitably declined, the hit has been nowhere near as devastating as initially feared. "We're seeing an average of about 10 per cent drop-off in listing activity, which is far less than what we were predicting," Mr Shields said. While those to the east, and even the west at times, boast of surges in house prices, South Australians usually see much more modest increases. It is for that reason that the SA market may be less vulnerable to the long-term impacts of COVID-19. "Between the election last year and February this year, Sydney and Melbourne in particular saw some quite big price gains," Mr Eslake said. "With worries about negative gearing out of the way and interest rates being cut again, they had a rebound in the property markets." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. But now, those gains are expected to be all but lost, with many homeowners and investors choosing to defer loan repayments as a way of making ends meet.  "When that expires at the end of September, we'll face higher or longer repayments because the banks aren't foregoing the interest, they're just deferring and capitalising it," Mr Eslake said. "And there'll be some people who've done that, who won't have jobs to go back to, and they may be forced to sell or may choose to sell.  "I don't think [South Australia] will have as many households in financial distress." The South Australian tourism industry has been dealt a double blow this year with the summer bushfires impacting two of its most popular destinations  the Adelaide Hills and Kangaroo Island. It will now take the industry even longer to recover, as travel restrictions due to coronavirus are expected to remain in place for months to come. But if there is a positive for South Australian regions it is that the state's share of international tourists has been much lower than its share of domestic tourists. Like the argument that the state's property sector may bounce back quicker, this means the travel industry may recover sooner too. Australian Bureau of Statistics data shows the number of short-term overseas visitors arriving in South Australia in 2018-19 represented only 3 per cent of the national total. It doesn't mean the state had less tourism  in fact, the figures show the percentage of employment and economic activity resulting from the tourism industry in South Australia is on par with the national average. It just means the tourism figures are largely driven by domestic visitors. "Because you're not as dependent on international tourism, the fact that that's going to take a lot longer to recover is less of a drag on South Australia than it will be for most other states," Mr Eslake said. All of this is not to say the coming months and years of recovery will be easy. But the difficult path to recovery may be made slightly less difficult for South Australia, given its hidden strengths. 
The Canberra Raiders will today seek an exemption from the NRL to allow three players to return to training, despite their refusal to get the flu shot. Raiders forwards Sia Soliola, Joe Tapine and Josh Papalii were told to stay away from training yesterday after they refused to sign an unmodified version of the vaccination waiver. Instead they crossed out the line "that they are at greater risk of getting the flu if they are not vaccinated". It is understood the trio protested the policy on cultural grounds. Players agreeing to get the flu jab is part of the NRL's strict biosecurity protocols that were put in place to allow the competition to restart on May 28. The move by the trio mirrors that of Gold Coast forward Bryce Cartwright, who is also believed to have crossed out the line on the waiver. Prime Minister Scott Morrison yesterday said a "no jab, no play" policy should apply to the NRL. However, Cartwright said in a social media post that he would not be forced into getting a flu jab. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "I won't be bullied into making decisions that could impact my health and the health of my family," he posted on social media. "Giving us the ultimatum of get the shot or be stood down is coercion and leaking private medical information is illegal. "As for me being the first and apparently only one declining the shot is b******t and far from the truth." An NRL spokesperson said players who refused to receive the shot would be dealt with on a case-by-case basis in consultation with club and NRL medical staff. A Rugby League Players' Association (RLPA) spokesman said a player who refused to be vaccinated had the option to sign a waiver so they could continue to train and be available for selection while their case was dealt with by the NRL. The spokesman said the RLPA strongly recommended flu shots but believed players who refused should be dealt with case-by-case and that the vaccination was not mandatory. Cartwright added that he was not an anti-vaxxer. "I stand for the freedom to choose what goes into our bodies  so to label me an 'anti-vaxxer' is spreading misinformation," he said. Cartwright's wife Shanelle posted on social media saying her children were a "picture of health" and that the couple was "not anti anything". Titans winger Dale Copley, who is also the RLPA player director, insisted that whether a player got the flu vaccine or not should be a personal choice. "He [Cartwright] is well and truly able to have the freedom to decide what goes in his body and what doesn't," he said. The Raiders will seek the exemption until the governing body finalises its position. 
As Ros Torrance smiled at the camera on the balcony of her luxury suite aboard the Ruby Princess, she had an inkling something wasn't quite right.  The $600 million cruise ship ticked all the boxes for Ms Torrance and her husband's holiday: a dozen restaurants, casino, bars, pools, mini-golf, a theatre and live entertainment every night.  It was late February and COVID-19 was still weeks away from being declared a pandemic but, as the cruise went on, she started to worry. "Everyone was talking about it. My husband and I were very careful," she said. The couple dined only in the exclusive Club Class dining room. "We didn't go to the buffet to eat," she said.  Ms Torrance was lucky: she was on the ship weeks before the infamous Ruby Princess cruise that has become the single largest source of COVID-19 infections in Australia.  In the final days of her trip, she thought it was unusual to hear announcements asking passengers with a fever to come to the medical centre. "Then they made an announcement that the New South Wales health authorities would not be letting us off when we docked," she said. "They would be coming on board and seeing people that were unwell and that nobody would be disembarking until they were happy," she said. Why New South Wales Health officials boarded that ship to check passengers but allowed thousands of passengers off the next Ruby Princess cruise is just one of the questions now being examined by a Special Commission of Inquiry.  As Ms Torrance waited to disembark on March 8, she noticed the ship was being cleaned. "I was immediately assailed by this incredible smell of disinfectant  we could see the next lot of passengers waiting to get on" she said. Tracey Temple and her mother were standing on the wharf below waiting to board. Their cruise had been delayed for hours and gossip was spreading fast that NSW Health was on board. "I heard that they were fumigating," Ms Temple said.  "I panicked and went and tried to find somebody from the cruise ship." Alarmed, she found a crew member. "I said to her, 'I would like to ask you a question. I am a kidney and pancreas transplant patient. I want to know if it's safe for myself and my mother to get onto this cruise?' "She said that the cruise ship would not let one passenger, let alone all passengers, be put at risk if it wasn't safe to sail," Ms Temple said. Ms Temple and her mother would soon join the hundreds of passengers on other Princess-branded ships who became infected with COVID-19. "I nearly lost my life and my transplant as well, because of somebody's neglect, somebody's stupidity, and the lies, just the lies that they told. "As far as I'm concerned, they put the mighty dollar first and they never put our safety first." Just five weeks before the Ruby Princess embarked on its ill-fated journey, its sister ship the Diamond Princess found itself at the centre of a major deadly outbreak. In late January, the ship sailed from Japan to Hong Kong. A passenger who got off there later tested positive for COVID-19. It took the company nearly two days to tell the 2,666 passengers the news. Melbourne woman Suzanne D'Silva and her family heard the captain announce a previous passenger had tested positive.  They felt assured the situation was under control. "We had no idea what was about to hit us," she said. After the announcement, cruise life continued: packed theatres remained open and guests kept visiting the buffet-style restaurants for meals. Suzanne and her family celebrated a birthday in one of the restaurants that night. The next day, the D'Silva's holiday came to an abrupt halt when the ship docked in Japan. Passengers were told they would be held under quarantine in their rooms for the next 14 days under an order from Japan's Ministry of Health. Japanese Infection Control Specialist Professor Kentaro Iwata boarded the ship to observe the authorities' handling of the outbreak.  He was horrified by what he found. "I don't think there was any strategy. I think the scheme was to contain everybody," Professor Iwata said. "I think the operation at the Diamond Princess was a failure.  "They allowed the spread of the disease inside the cruise ship and they were not being mindful about the fact that many passengers were elderly people who are susceptible to severe diseases." A week after quarantine began, Suzanne D'Silva's daughter was diagnosed with COVID-19. "You're enclosed, you're breathing in this air. The food is coming open. It could be anywhere," she said. "You're hiding from something you don't know and where do you hide?" Three of the four members of the D'Silva family joined more than 700 people on board the Diamond Princess who contracted COVID-19. The company encouraged crew and guests to share images with #princessproud as the quarantine dragged on. Some passengers were confined to windowless cabins, only allowed out once a day to see sunlight. Princess Cruises is part of the world's largest cruise conglomerate, Carnival Corporation, which includes nine brands and over 100 ships in its fleet.  Despite the disaster on board the Diamond Princess, the company was determined to continue sailing. At the end of February, Carnival Corporation's chief medical officer, Dr Grant Tarling, reassured passengers it was safe to cruise. "We've learned a lot from the world's top experts and have stepped up our health protocols even more," he said. "The cruising experience continues to be an exceptional and safe way to travel the world." But less than a week after that message was posted on social media, the company was hit with a second major COVID-19 outbreak. In early March, 21 people aboard the Grand Princess, off the coast of California, tested positive to the virus. The ship was stranded for weeks while authorities scrambled to work out how to manage the outbreak. By March 8, after an hours-long delay, the Ruby Princess set sail from Sydney's Circular Quay on its ill-fated journey. Passengers settled into their holiday, enjoying theatre performances and a Rod Stewart impersonator and dining in the dozen restaurants on board. Ms Temple remembers the mood on board shifting four days into the trip. "We were watching the news and we didn't know until we were on the ship that it had been classed as a pandemic. Then of course, you panic and you think, 'Oh my God, you know, there's no way you can get off'." Princess Cruises announced it would halt all new cruises for the next 60 days. In a video announcement, president Jan Swartz posed the question on everyone's mind. "We've been asked and we've asked ourselves, why COVID-19 seems to be impacting Princess so heavily  We don't really know," she said. Things were about to get worse.  As the Ruby Princess continued on its journey around New Zealand, some on board began to fall ill. Ms Temple and her mother were among them.  It was nothing serious, they thought; just a dry cough and upset stomach. "I wouldn't go to the doctor because they charge you like a wounded bull. I just put it down to a transplant thing, I didn't ever have it cross my mind that it was COVID-19." On March 14, the ship docked in Napier and passengers spread across the town, visiting shops and taking bus tours. Some 24 locals would later test positive for the virus. The Ruby Princess couldn't test for COVID-19 on board but doctors could take viral swabs for processing on shore.  When the ship docked in Wellington the next day, five samples were tested for the virus. All came back negative. In mid-March, the New Zealand and Australian governments announced a ban on all incoming cruise ships. The Ruby Princess headed back to Sydney early. On the way back, the ship's senior physician, Dr Ilse Von Watzdorf, wrote in an email to NSW Health: "It seems we are in the early stages of an influenza A outbreak." But the message being delivered to concerned passengers was very different. "They just kept reassuring you all the time, 'this ship is virus-free'." Ms Temple said.  "The steward that comes and cleans your room. He kept saying 'no, we're clear. This ship is good, we are free. We don't have to worry.'" The Ruby Princess was required to send logs with the number of sick passengers to Federal authorities. The first report showed 53 people were sick and 10 had a temperature. Over the next two days, those numbers more than doubled. NSW Health also wrote to the ship, requesting further information about sick passengers. On the morning of March 18, the ship's doctor reported 104 people had presented to the medical centre with "acute respiratory illness" but only 36 guests, or 0.94 per cent of those on board, had "influenza-like illness". It was this figure, of just less than 1 per cent, that led NSW Health to classify the ship as "low-risk". But the department knew some passengers were in isolation and had been swabbed for COVID 19. What NSW Health didn't know was that the number of sick people on board had continued to climb. The ship's doctor later told the Ruby Princess Inquiry that she was very busy and had forgotten to send through the details of more unwell passengers and crew who had come forward later that day. On the ship's final night at sea, passengers mingled on board, oblivious to the risk posed by the virus. The ship's atrium was filled with passengers for a farewell party. Shortly afterwards, on shore in Sydney, a Carnival Australia Port Agent called 000 to request an ambulance for two passengers on board. She told the operator staff would need to wear protective gear because both had "been tested for coronavirus". That information triggered a late-night decision by the NSW Port Authority to deny the ship pilotage. An hour later, that decision was overturned after the head of the Port Authority spoke to a senior manager at Carnival Australia. He reassured her that the ambulances were not called for COVID-19 reasons and that NSW Health had determined the ship was low-risk. At 2:30am, the Ruby Princess docked in Sydney Harbour and the two ill passengers were rushed to the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital.  A Carnival staffer handed 13 COVID-19 swabs to a pathology courier. Three, including the two taken by ambulance to hospital, would later test positive for the virus. On board the ship on the night of March 18, passengers slept, unaware of the drama unfolding around them. Passengers disembarked early that morning. American Travel Agent Diane Fish led a tour group of 10 people off the cruise.  "It was a long line of crew members with their hands up," she said. "So you're doing this high-five all the way down the ship and I'm thinking, "Oh, my God. I just touched 50 people". When she returned to Miami, Ms Fish tested positive to COVID-19 along with 6 out of her 10-person tour group. "We felt safer on the ship. I mean, we thought we were going to go into the problem. We didn't realise we were going to be the problem," she said. At least 850 passengers and crew have contracted COVID-19 and 24 people are dead. A Special Commission of Inquiry and a police investigation are now trying to get the bottom of who is responsible. Ms Temple blames Princess Cruises for not cancelling the trip.  "Yes, NSW health let us disembark the ship, but Princess Cruises put us on the ship to begin with. They should have cancelled the cruise before us to safeguard us. Because they have a duty of care, or supposedly a duty of care to look after their passengers, and they did not," she said.  Princess Cruises senior vice-president for the Asia-Pacific, Stuart Allison, insisted the company had fulfilled all of its requirements under NSW and federal laws. "Even so, our onboard team had taken no chances, they required guests who reported flu-like symptoms to [remain in] cabins," he said in a video released the week after the ship docked. "The medical team was asked to provide swabs. Our guests could disembark because that was the official government process at the time." Regardless of who is to blame, Ms Temple said she will never be getting on a cruise ship again. "My opinion is that they should put it [Ruby Princess] somewhere out in the middle of the ocean and sink it," she said.  
Students return to schools in New South Wales, Queensland, Tasmania and the ACT today, as coronavirus restrictions continue to ease across the country. Follow today's events as they unfold.  By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale 
North Queensland's resources sector is creating much-needed employment as companies press on with expansions during the coronavirus pandemic. Sun Metals in Townsville is months away from reaching peak construction of its $450 million zinc refinery expansion to increase annual production, mostly into Asian markets. Executive director Kathy Danaher said Sun Metals would have created 350 construction jobs by about October, and 100 ongoing positions as construction finishes in the second quarter of 2021. "We're at the pointy end, we're seeing buildings going up [and] connections within piping," Ms Danaher said. Ravenswood Gold has started hiring the dozens of contractors and 150 permanent employees it needs by mid-2021 as it works to extend the mine's life with a large-scale open pit at Ravenswood, south-west of Townsville. "It'll be better for the state, it'll be better for the community  and generally better for the business," CEO Brett Fletcher said. For years, Townsville's unemployment rate has been above the national and state averages but it had been improving before the pandemic hit. Townsville economist Colin Dwyer said the expansions were timely. "We're creating jobs. They're high-income jobs and  they're going to be spending their money, hopefully, in local businesses," Mr Dwyer said. Mr Dwyer said there were dozens of north Queensland construction projects, in a range of industries, that would start soon or had high confidence in proceeding and were just as important in recovering the economy. For example, 270 construction jobs were expected to be created from November when a technology innovation complex was built at James Cook University. "It's that diversification and the essentialness in the projects that are key for recovery," Mr Dwyer said. "If we simply had one specialised area with all of those projects in it, and let's say it's tourism, we would struggle to recover quicker than other regions. That's quicker, not necessarily quickly." Another Townsville economist, Jonathon Pavetto, agreed, and added a call for more investment. "If we really want the economy [to grow], we really need governments to open the chequebook when it comes to infrastructure," he said. It's a similar story in Central Queensland, where a recent study named Emerald among the least economically vulnerable Australian towns to the impact of coronavirus restrictions. BHP has recently put on 125 apprentices in Mackay and Pembroke has received conditional approval to build a new coking-coal mine in the Bowen Basin. ANZ senior commodities strategist Daniel Hynes said Australia's mining sector had held up relatively well but noted project closures and staff lay-offs for some markets. "Companies are obviously  looking at costs  and that's going to result in new projects coming online a little less frequently than we've seen in the past," Mr Hynes said. He said the expansion of the north Queensland gold and zinc projects made sense. "The [gold sector] has been in very strong demand. The zinc side, there is still a little bit of uncertainty around what the post COVID-19 environment will be like," he said. "While these decisions are based on long-term dynamics, even the shorter-term issues should benefit from demand for these products." 
On the breakwater at the surf beach in Brunswick Heads a group of men are reverently singing a rousing Russian revolutionary song. They are dressed as Russian workers, in cloth caps. There is emotional conviction and Russian passion in this song about solidarity. But, infact,none of these comrades have ever been anywhere near the Motherland, seenawindsweptsteppe, or traversed a frozen tundra. Nor do any of them speak Russian (although they do like a vodka). In his impressive fake Russian accent, master of ceremonies for the choir,Mark Swivel, explains: "Dustyeskyis the leading genuine fake Russian choir in southern hemisphere. "We are 28 men, middle-aged, very hairy, and we all live outside the tiny little hamlet of Mullumbimby or, as we call it,Mullumgrad. "And all of us singing like we know the language and the words." Mullumbimby is asmall,subtropicaltown near Byron Bay in northern New South Wales. A freewheeling place of yoga,marijuana, veggies and decidedly alternative ways of being. Not an easy place, then, to summon the suffering in the songs of the battlefields, the despair of the proletarian worker. But Mark says the songs "pick you up, they make you sing them, they sweep youaway". It all began as a bit of a sing and a few beers at the RSL on Tuesday nights. "They had to come up with these elaborate excuses to leave the house," localwriter andcomedian Mandy Nolan tells Australian Story. "They all live in relationships where they have to co-parent and do half the cooking. You don't just go out to the pub with these dudes, you've got to have an excuse. And a Russian choir,thatsit." But then they accidentally went viral, were picked up by Russian television and are now known to millions of Russian people. The ideacame from "comrade" Glenn Wright, a former co-owner and talent booker for Sydney's Harbourside Brasserie, who moved to Byron Shire and started the Mullum Music Festival. "I've had a longstanding love affair with the music of Russia, the great Russian composers and also the marching army songs," he says.  Glenn wanted a Russian choir for the festival but couldn't afford to fly one out, so he hatched the idea of creating one locally. It was 2:00am at a party when they were drinking vodka that Glenn ran into Andrew Swain, an actualchoirmaster. "That was when he asked me. Well, I was pretty much anybody's at that stage," Andrew says. Singing ability was not a high priority when Andrew put the call out.  "I didn't audition anybody, I do believe that everybody can sing," he says. It was about looking the part. "We looked for hairy people, so hairy men, woolly men, men that you could find at the bar late at night." Mark points out that singing ability is subjective. "I have heard some people say thatDustyeskyhas three type of men: one with excellent voice, two, kind of hold a tune, and three, good to have a drink with. We sing perfectfour-partharmony, even though some of us cannot sing." Getting carried away by the music is the point, Andrew says. "When I'm teaching an amazing song to a bunch of people who aren't accomplished singers and we're also drinking beer, usually at the same time, you know, pretty much anything can happen." Although "comrade" Swivel likes to say all the choir members live in shipping containers, work in a typewriter factory, are salmon smokers and make gherkin liqueur, he is in fact a lawyer. "They're from all walks of life," Andrew says of the men. "They're nut farmers, teachers, plumbers, carpenters, musiciansand builders." From their inaugural gig at the Bangalow Hotel in Byron Shire, competing, Mark says, with "greyhounds on television, people playing on the poker machines, and the men in hi-vis vests drinkingTooheysNew", they knew something special was happening. "Everybody dancing and behaving in quite a silly fashion," he says in his trademark faux Russian accent. Perhaps it was the toasts with Russian vodka to make the performance more culturally appropriate, maybe it was Mark announcing that, "now we look forward to meeting yourwomensandlivestocks", aftertheperformance,but suddenly they were in demand at festivals at a time when they only had three songs. Over time the stages got bigger. Theysangat festivals in Melbourne and Sydney, andfor thousands atAdelaide'sWomadelaideFestival. "You could always spot the Russians in the audience because they were the ones crying or singing along to every verse," Andrew says. The Russian ambassador and his entourage came to see them, the ambassador looking, Mark says,like a Bond villain. TheRussianimpostorswere "terrified", Andrew says, when therealRussians started noticing themand their journalists came to interview them. "We were really nervous about whether they would like us or hate us,"he says. Then "out of the blue"theRussia-1TVnetworkpicked up a clip they had made and played it at the end of every news bulletin. It was possibly the only time the word Mullumbimby had been spoken by a Russian broadcaster. "Suddenly my phone started getting messages from Russia in the middle of the night," Andrew says. They were a hit. Bigtimeski. Then came the call from the Russian Ministry of Culture inviting them to sing in Red Square forthe ImmortalRegiment at theGrand Victory Day Parade on May 9. The full Russian display, "250,000 people and [President Vladimir] Putin and the tanks and all the stuff," Andrew says incredulously. The Russian Government were flying 28 men half-way round the world to sing for fourminutes."Most of men not last that long," jokes Mark as his Russian alter ego. "We give it a crack anyway." However, the COVID-19 pandemicstopped the event and Dustyesky's big trip to the Motherland.  Instead, Russian televisionreporters helped the choir to put a clip together. Filmed on theiriPhones in isolation, the group of Aussie men recorded a beautiful yet tragic song about tanks on the battlefield, and a soldier who will not make it home to his family. The Russia Today TV network edited the clip and broadcast it during the Victory Day telecast. The men of Dustyesky were amazed. "Millions of people have watched it and I've been getting hundreds andhundredsofcomments from Russian people saying, 'you guys are amazing, this is incredible'," Andrew says. "It turns out that Russian people are really generous and are quite forgiving about pretty crappy accents." Mark isn't letting COVID-19 restrictions stop the choir singing. "We are choir born for pandemics, most infectious choir on the planet right now," he says. As Dustyesky's popularity surged, a Russian choir sent back a love letter.TheChoir of Udmurtia in the Volga responded with a rendition of Waltzing Matilda.The respect worked both ways. Markhasalso extended aninvitation tothe Kremlin to come share a brew or two and sing a few songs. "We invite President Putin to come toMullumgrad to hang out in the river together. We take off our shirts and cover ourselves in macadamia butter and see what happens," he says. It has taken a motley choir from Mullumbimby to return ancient folk songs and classic songs that were notoftensung anymore to Russian culture. And still have a drink and a laugh. Dustyeskyis proof you can have Russian soul if you really want to. "The songs of Russia are actually the songs of entire world," Mark says. "That is the lesson, if you want one, ofDustyesky. That there is no particular culture, there is just the song, and it holds all of us within it." Watch Dustyesky on Australian Story, 8:00pm (AEST), ABCTV and iview. 
As more than 600,000 students from years 2 to 10 return to school, Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk says parents can be reassured that no new coronavirus cases have been recorded in Queensland overnight. "I want to thank all the school communities for getting the schools prepared, all the efforts that have gone in, the cleaning and the COVID safe plans and the rapid response plans are in place if there was to be an outbreak," Ms Palaszczuk said this morning. "All of our students are back at school today, and I know there are lots of students happy to back in the classroom, but also lots of happy parents out there." Latest information from Queensland Health. Maddeline Bailey returned to year 1 two weeks ago, leaving her big sister Charlotte to continue being home schooled by their busy parents at their Morningside home in Brisbane's east. The six-year-old was one of 185,000 littlies and senior students who were allowed to return to classrooms in a post-lockdown easing of restrictions. Today it is Charlotte's turn to return to school. Dad Julian Bailey said it had been a "stressful nine weeks", particularly at the start of the lockdown period, with the last two weeks dragging on a little.  "It has been surreal and hats off to teaching staff at all the schools.  "They have had to split themselves in many more ways than we would in a normal workplace," he said.  Mum Sylvia Vos who had been working as an engineer from home said Charlotte was over the moon about putting an end to digital play dates and being able to see her friends face-to-face. "It has been challenging it has been really interesting to work together as a family unit and we often sit down with the girls and say you know we need to work at this together and there was times we would get cranky and impatient," she said.  Both parents are celebrating their freedom and the daytime peace and quiet in the house from today. "I won't have Skype videos with a child just appearing in the corner at the back somewhere because that has been happening quite a lot, and you say, 'oh hello,'" Ms Vos said.  They plan a coffee catch-up out of the house to mark the post COVID-19 lockdown, and maybe a glass of wine tonight.  "We have been self-medicating a little with wine at night, but now life will get back to normal," she laughed.  At Pullenvale State School in Brisbane's west, year 4 student Amelie Goodsir said she was relieved to get back to school after learning at home. "All my brothers and sisters were annoying me," she said. She was most looking forward to seeing her friends and teachers. Zhenya Kireev dropped off both his kids  Stan in year 2 and Elena in prep this morning. "It's good to have them back at school to study properly," he said. "It [home learning] was on and off, it was OK but I think it's better for them to go back." Fellow Pullenvale parent Claire Brodie said she had mixed emotions about dropping off her two children to prep and year 3 classes. "I've been quiet happy to have them home and being homeschooled, but then it's quite nice that they're going into school and seeing all their friends," she said. "And they've been missing their teachers so they're happy to go." For the Malloy family from Runaway Bay it is a huge weight off their shoulders. They've been in lockdown for over eight weeks, teaching two children at home, while also working from home. Mum Kelly worked for a mental health charity while dad Craig ran his marketing business. From piano lessons to maths, they said it was stressful and a challenge to keep juggling all their commitments. But this morning as they send 11-year-old Zara and nine-year-old Lincoln back to formal lessons they have mixed emotions. "It is quite a strange situation, school itself will be a bit different, it is a drop off and go system so no parent contact," Ms Malloy said. "And it's been hard trying to remember what to do, like we couldn't find their school shoes this morning because they have not worn them for so long. "But it will be nice to get back into a routine as the kids have been missing the structure and their friends.  "So hopefully smooth sailing from here."  Parents are concerned their children will struggle with social distancing rules, but Education Minister Grace Grace said they have no need to worry.  "Students don't require to necessarily be physical distancing or social distancing because of the practically of that," she said. "But obviously, we need to maintain our social distance for adults, for teachers, for parents not to gather around outside the school in carparks, for staff to stagger breaks." Ms Grace said schools were stocked up on cleaning supplies and had been thoroughly cleaned in the lead up to students returning.  School activities like sport would be off limit and there would also be staggered lunch breaks.  Queensland Secondary Schools Principals Association President Mark Breckenridge said his 600 members would be feeling a mix of excitement relief but also a degree of trepidation as they welcome students back.  A recent study found Queensland principals were the most stressed, depressed and burnt out in the nation.  The world pandemic adding to the pressure on them to create a "safe new normal" as kids were welcomed back.  "A lot of schools have pivoted a number of times to adjust to different ways of teaching and learning and this is the next step and hopefully the final step," Mr Breckenridge said.  "I think you have just pinch yourself and think has this really been real. "It has been an incredibly strange and trying year for everyone. "It seems like we finished Christmas and the summer break with the bushfires all around and the emotional toll that had on people and all of a sudden this virus arrives." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Dean of Education at Griffith University Professor Donna Pendergast said it was not surprising some students were anxious going back as "schooling is now so different from when everyone left". "We need to check children feel well supported at school and that their friendship groups have been re-established," she said. She was also urging children to not to think about their grades just yet, because their social and emotional well-being was more important at this stage. Term two will run until late June.  
She's only six years old, but Sylvana's education has already served up challenges most kids won't even need to think about during their entire school life. When the COVID-19 crisis closed her school, Sylvana was forced to switch to online learning in a home that didn't even have a computer. "We just had Nanny's mobile phone," Sylvana said. For the first three weeks, Sylvana and her grandmother Sylvia  her primary carer  both struggled. "We [were] learning through the mobile phone, which was very difficult at times because you couldn't even read it," Sylvia said. "I'm 63, Sylvana's nearly seven. And I'm thinking, it's been that many years since I've been to school, how am I going to help her?" Sylvia had never asked for help before, but she steeled herself and approached the Smith Family. The charity supplied a laptop and internet connection. "I felt so happy," Sylvana said, before adding with a laugh: "But Nanny opened the box so I was a little bit angry." Even with the laptop it's been a struggle, and Sylvia knows Sylvana has fallen behind. "I think there's going to be a lot of work catching up, because I can only do so much," Sylvia said. The Smith Family, Australia's leading educational charity, has produced a report based on its work helping 700 schools and 50,000 disadvantaged students during the COVID-19 crisis. It's the broadest look yet at the impact of Australia's biggest education experiment in decades  remote learning  and the implications for the futures of many young people. The report identifies eight key areas of concern:  The "digital divide" faced by families without computers or internet, or multiple children sharing one device  Challenges with homeschooling such as the stress of establishing new routines and financial pressures from the cost of stationery, printing, etc  Increased risk of students disengaging altogether  particularly those starting high school this year, or in year 10  Unemployment as many tertiary students lose their jobs  Mental health concerns  Limitations on family life and loss of family supports creating issues with interactions with extended family  Food insecurity and the closure of school breakfast clubs, with one family's weekly food budget increasing from $200 to $350  Delays and difficulty accessing support services A separate report released today by the Centre for Independent Studies (CIS) warns disadvantaged students in NSW, Queensland, Victoria, Tasmania and the ACT will have fallen several weeks behind. Using US data on normal schools compared to online schools, and applying the findings to NAPLAN results in Australia, the think tank estimates those students will have to catch up one to two weeks' lost learning in reading and two to three weeks' in numeracy. "The learning lost due to Australian school closures is not irretrievable, but it does require state and territory governments to assess students on return to school, identify those who have fallen behind, and provide intensive intervention to ensure they catch up with their peers," the CIS report says. Source: Pain without gain: Why school closures are bad policy, Centre for Independent Studies Jasmyn Lloyd is seen as a future Indigenous leader, but the 20-year-old medical student from rural SA is finding it tough just getting by at the moment. She too was supported by the charity in school, and surprised herself by getting the marks she needed to study medicine. She dreams of returning to a small community as a rural GP after she finishes university, but COVID-19 has threatened her hard work. A Smith Family scholarship meant she could buy a laptop to keep up with remote learning, but the pandemic led to the loss of her part-time job and her parents can't assist her financially. "It was a lot of shock horror," she said. "There was a lot of times where I'm like, 'I'm going to have to move back home, I'm going to have to quit uni, I can't afford to stay in the city anymore', and it was getting to the stage where I was almost having to pack my bags." Again, the Smith Family's insights suggest Ms Lloyd's experience is all too common, with tertiary students from disadvantaged backgrounds facing similar challenges to schoolkids. Many have had to deal with changed living arrangements, especially those who had been staying on campus or in student accommodation. Some also did not have access to internet, computers or affordable data, and were reliant on financial help. In addition to appealing for donations to its winter relief program the charity is calling on governments, corporations and the community to help these students. The report says "tackling digital disadvantage" should be a top priority in the pandemic recovery. When coronavirus suddenly tilted the educational playing field, Ryan Hicklin  stuck with just a pre-paid mobile phone  did not have the tools he needed to learn. Then a charity stepped in to help. It calls on telecommunications companies to find ways to offer further help to low-income families, following NBN Co's $150 million COVID-19 relief package. "This could involve discounting retail prices, or the direct provision of data and home internet packages to target groups," the report says. It also calls for technical support helplines for parents and carers who need help with digital proficiency and students' online learning platforms. Smith Family CEO Lisa O'Brien said vulnerable students returning to school might need additional learning support to make up for lost time. "It's important we act now so these students don't fall even further behind," she said. The ABC understands states are working on testing programs to identify students who have fallen behind. 
Lisa Gossling slept by her mother Pat's side in her final days at the nursing home and was there as the 82-year-old drew her last breath. "I said, 'You can do this, it's okay' and she peacefully went in the middle of one of her favourite songs," she said. Within days of Pat's passing, the COVID-19 response went from a few measures to funerals limited to just 10 people. For Lisa, saying goodbye instantly became more complicated. "My brother's got six kids, my sister's got two, we've got three  how do you choose what eight people go to that funeral?" Surfers Paradise Catholic Priest Peter Dillon and his colleague have conducted more than 20 funerals since the March restrictions were put in place. He witnessed first-hand how coronavirus was changing the grieving process. "The family and the loved ones also have the added issue of having to decide who can be there, how they select the closest friends and relatives," he said. For journalist Osman Faruqi, the death of a friend last week came as a shock. Sam, a talented writer and close friend, was just 23 years old. "They were the young person in the prime of their lives who brought so much joy and love to people around them," he said. "Hearing that they had gone has led to this intense flood of emotions that don't quite make sense." Faruqi told The Drum that grieving had been harder than he could have predicted. "To try and make sense of [your emotions], you want to be around people who understand what you are feeling," he said. Travel restrictions have meant it was more difficult for Osman to get back to Sydney, where Sam lived. "I certainly never expected myself to be in a situation where someone very close to me passed away and the first thought I had was, 'Will I be able to attend the funeral? How will I get there and physically be in a space where I can grieve with people?'" Senior Rabbi Yaakov Glasman from the St Kilda Hebrew Congregation said COVID-19 created a "vacuum" of human connection in recent weeks. "My sense is that mourners are more vulnerable then they were before." It is not unusual for hundreds of people to normally attend an Orthodox Jewish Funeral. "[Now] you feel like you are walking into this empty space, it just doesn't have the same kind of spirit," he said. Rabbi Glasman told The Drum that live streaming funeral services were always available but now it is a requirement, rather than an addition. This includes hosting the seven-day mourning period  the shiva gathering  via Zoom. "My sense has been that families that have taken up [that] opportunity have been deeply grateful for it." "When they felt most alone and they felt most vulnerable it was the ability to be able to connect  albeit via Zoom or via technology  that gave them a sense of comfort and a sense of feeling supported during their difficult times." "A good funeral enables people to grieve well, to go through the process of separation from the people they loved," Reverend Dr Colleen O'Reilly told The Drum. Rev O'Reilly said the ritual of a funeral is a fundamental part of making sense of the "chaotic" world people can find themselves in after a loved one has died. Like Rabbi Yaakov Glasman, both the Lebanese Muslim Association and Surfer's Paradise Catholic Parish made the necessary changes to keep the funeral process as "normal" as it could be, in COVID times. Father Peter Dillon was "pleasantly surprised" by his community's response  particularly to the restrictions on the number of people who could be physically present at the event. "Not having to speak to large crowds of people allows us to be a lot more personal, a lot more connected with what is taking place." He's now considering continuing to offer streaming as part of his services post-COVID-19. The Lebanese Muslim Association told The Drum their funeral proceedings would normally involve hundreds, sometimes thousands of people. "The [distancing] rules have been something the community really had to grapple with," he said. The group has chosen not to stream services, out of respect for the deceased. But Ahmad Malas said they were able to find ways to maintain the very communal way of saying goodbye. "People have been providing that continuous support to the family over the phone or through social media like Facebook, WhatsApp." Father Dillon said plans to regroup after restrictions are eased might be too much for some. "People may not necessarily have the inner strength to be able to replicate this again down the track." But for others, it's an opportunity. Pat's body has been cremated and Lisa plans to have a memorial with family and friends when the COVID-19 threat has passed. "I think it's given us a breather to find out what we really want. "I think with time to process it, we'll be like, 'this is the right way forward'." 
The Japanese Government is reportedly putting the final touches on a relief package worth more than $1 trillion as the country's economy prepares for its worst slump since World War II. Meanwhile, Europeans and Americans took advantage of the first holiday weekend since coronavirus restrictions were eased, while British Prime Minister Boris Johnson voiced his support for Dominic Cummings, his senior adviser who travelled across England during the lockdown. This story will be regularly updated throughout Monday. Japan is finalising a coronavirus relief package worth more than 100 trillion yen ($1.4 trillion), following last month's 117-trillion-yen stimulus, according to reports in the Nikkei newspaper. The package, to be funded by a second extra budget for the current fiscal year beginning in April, would be the latest effort by Tokyo to support an economy on track for its deepest slump since World War II, as the pandemic crushes businesses and consumer spending. Japan ended state of emergency measures for most regions and plans to hold a panel discussion on Monday to decide whether to lift them in remaining places, including Tokyo. "Japan's economy is in an extremely severe state and we need to pull out of this situation as soon as we can," Finance Minister Taro Aso said last week. The Government is expected to approve the budget after Japan's economy slipped into recession in the last quarter, with analysts expecting another 22 per cent contraction in April-June due to the hit from the health crisis. The deepening pain from the pandemic is forcing the Government to add to Japan's huge debt pile, which is already twice the size of its economy, to pay for big spending plans. According to a study by Columbia University economics professor Ceyhun Elgin, Japan has some of the most aggressive relief spending of any country, with its last package worth more than 20 per cent of the country's GDP. That compares to around 14 per cent in the US and 11 per cent in Australia spent on bailouts and stimulus. The Birdsville races, known as the Melbourne Cup of the outback, will not go ahead this year due to coronavirus concerns. Famous for its dusty track in the Simpson Desert, the two-day event draws thousands of people to the small town in Queensland's Diamantina Shire, which normally has a population of just 115 people. The races were set to be held on September 4 and 5, but have been cancelled in a devastating blow for the town's economy. "As much as we were holding onto the hope that we could run them, we're at a point where we've had to concede defeat. The health of our patrons, and those who live in Outback Queensland, is of paramount importance to us and it is impossible to know what the status with COVID-19 will be come September," Birdsville Race Club president Gary Brook said. "We have been following the Queensland Government's roadmap for easing of restrictions, and with the easing of restrictions on mass gatherings not currently part of the roadmap, it is too much of a stretch to expect that by September we could safely host thousands of people in Birdsville." Birdsville has hosted the races since 1882 but it was last cancelled as recently as 2007, due to equine influenza. The 2021 edition of the races has been pencilled in for September 3 and 4, when organisers are hoping for a record crowd thanks to a possible boom in domestic tourism. The Government does not plan to expand the criteria or the timeframe for JobKeeeper and JobSeeker payments introduced during the pandemic, according to the Treasurer. Despite the Government having to spend $60 billion less than expected on JobKeeper payments due to errors made by businesses filling out applications, Josh Frydenberg told News Breakfast there were no plans for "wholesale changes". Mr Frydenberg emphasised both the new JobKeeper program and the boosted JobSeeker payment (formerly Newstart) are "temporary, targeted and proportionate to the challenge we face". He did, however, flag that the tourism sector could be in need of more assistance, with international borders set to remain closed even as the rest of the country opens up, which would be a topic of conversation at a scheduled review of JobKeeper next month. "The tourism sector could be one sector in need of further support. That's what we'll look at in the context of the economic situation at the time. You'll continue to see our international borders closed for some time," he said. "It's estimated some 850,000 people will be back in work as a result of those three stages of restrictions being lifted. That's the way to get people back into a job."  Europeans soaked up plenty of sun where they could over the weekend, as governments grappled with how and when to safely let in foreign travellers to salvage the vital summer tourist season. Across Europe, a mishmash of travel restrictions appears to be on the horizon, often depending on where travellers live and what passports they carry.  Germany, France and other countries aim to open their borders for European travel in mid-June, but it isn't clear when intercontinental travel will resume. Spain, one of the worst-hit countries in the pandemic and also one of the world's top destinations for international travellers, says it won't reopen for foreign tourists until July. In Germany, domestic tourists will be allowed to return to Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania in the north-east  home to the country's Baltic Sea coast  and to hotels in Berlin this week. The La Grande-Motte resort beach in France came up with a way to control its usual weekend crowds by introducing a booking system. Beachgoers must pre-book an 8-square-metre patch of sand online, and that area will will be roped off to keep them a safe distance from others. Reservations are free but required, and there is already a two-day waiting list. In Paris, where all city parks remain closed, locals soaked up the sun along the embankments of the Seine River and lounged on ledges outside the Tuileries Gardens.  From Thursday, the White House will start denying admission to foreigners who have been in Brazil during the two-week period before they hoped to enter the US, broadening its travel ban against countries hit hardest by coronavirus. President Donald Trump had already banned travel from the United Kingdom, Europe and China, and flagged last week that he was considering similar restrictions for Brazil. The US leads the world in the number of confirmed cases, with more than 1.6 million, followed by Brazil (363,000) and Russia (344,000). An adviser to Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro said the restrictions followed previously established benchmarks, playing down the move from Mr Trump, whose support Mr Bolsonaro has touted. "There is nothing specific against Brazil. We hope that'll be temporary," tweeted Filipe Martins, an advisor on international affairs to the Brazilian President. Press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said Mr Trump's latest move was designed to "protect our country", which is expected to pass 100,000 coronavirus deaths in coming days. As with the other bans, it does not apply to legal permanent residents or spouses, parents or children of US citizens or legal permanent residents. Brazil has recorded more than 22,000 deaths  the fifth highest tally in the world. The Memorial Day weekend, which marks the unofficial start of summer in the US, meant big crowds at beaches and warnings from authorities about people disregarding the coronavirus social-distancing rules. Americans traditionally spend the weekend travelling to beaches, gathering at backyard barbecues and unfurling picnic blankets in parks. Among those soaking in the sun and enjoying a bit of travel on Saturday was President Donald Trump, who was seen golfing at his Trump National Golf Club in northern Virginia, his first golf outing since the White House declared a national emergency over the coronavirus outbreak in March. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson has backed senior adviser Dominic Cummings, despite calls from within his own Conservative Party for the aide to resign for travelling more than 400 kilometres during the coronavirus lockdown.  "I conclude that in travelling to find the right kind of childcare, at the moment when both he and his wife were about to be incapacitated by coronavirus, and when he had no alternative  I think he followed the instincts of every father, and every parent. And I do not mark him down for that.," Mr Johnson said. "I believe that in every respect he has acted responsibly and legally." Mr Cummings, who masterminded the 2016 Brexit campaign, came under pressure after it emerged that he had travelled from London to Durham in late March while showing symptoms of COVID-19, when Britain was under a strict lockdown to combat the outbreak. Since players returned to limited group training earlier this week, eight positive tests for the virus have been confirmed at England's top football clubs. Six individuals, including Watford defender Adrian Mariappa and Burnley assistant manager Ian Woan, were positive in the first round of testing on May 17-18. A Bournemouth player was one of two people working for Premier League clubs who tested positive following a second batch of testing No matches have been played in the Premier League since March, but the UK Government has given the go-ahead for elite sport to resume from June 1. The Premier League's Project Restart envisages a return to competitive action in June, although no date has been fixed. Similarly, the Spanish La Liga competition has been given the green light by Spanish authorities to return to action from June 8. All organised soccer in Spain was provisionally suspended on March 12, although clubs in the top two divisions have since returned to group training. La Liga has yet to officially confirm a date on which it will resume, although its president Javier Tebas had said previously he hoped the season could restart on June 12. ABC/wires 
Hundreds of deaths from "coronavirus-like symptoms" have raised fears COVID-19 is rapidly spreading undetected throughout war-torn Yemen, where the United Nations and medical workers say the health care system "has in effect collapsed". According to official numbers, Yemen have confirmed 212 infections and 39 deaths, but with one of lowest rates of testing in the world, aid workers fear this figure is "just the tip of the iceberg". Medicins Sans Frontieres (MSF) reported on Friday as many as 80 people were dying at home per day  up from a pre-outbreak norm of 10  in the city of Aden, where the international aid group run the only dedicated COVID-19 centre in southern Yemen. "What we are seeing in our treatment centre is just the tip of the iceberg in terms of the number of people infected and dying in the city," said Caroline Seguin, MSF's operations manager for Yemen. "People are coming to us too late to save, and we know that many more people are not coming at all. They are just dying at home." Earlier this month, Save the Children reported at least 385 deaths within one week from "coronavirus-like symptoms" in Aden. War-ravaged Yemen, whose malnourished population has among the world's lowest immunity levels to disease, is divided between the Saudi-backed Government based in Aden and its foe, the Iran-aligned Houthi group, in the north. This week Jens Laerke, spokesman for the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, told a Geneva briefing that after five years of war and now a pandemic, "Yemen is really on the brink" and its health system "has in effect collapsed". The UN estimates that it will seek $US2 billion ($3 billion) for Yemen to maintain aid programs through to the end of the year, Mr Laerke said. "If we do not get the money coming in, the programs that are keeping people alive, are very much essential to fighting back against COVID, will have to close," he said. "And then the world will have to witness . . . what happens without a functioning health system battling COVID. I do not think the world wants to see that." Aid agencies say Yemen desperately needs medical equipment, protective gear for health workers and widespread testing to combat the virus. In a report, the International Rescue Committee (IRC) listed coronavirus testing rates in Yemen among the lowest in the world  31 tests per million, compared to 45,910 tests per million in Australia and 38,394 tests per million in the United States. As coronavirus spreads around the globe, health experts and aid groups fear some of the world's most vulnerable countries in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and the Pacific could become new hotspots for COVID-19. "[The] significant shortfall in COVID-19 testing in many conflict-affected countries highlights the dangerous prospect of undetected and therefore uncontrolled outbreaks as the coronavirus continues to spread globally," the report said. The IRC's president and chief executive David Miliband said a "global response" was crucial to "beat the pandemic". "We are in a race against time  This pandemic will not come to an end here until it is under control everywhere," he said. "COVID-19 has already brought the strongest health systems in the world to their knees," Mr Miliband said, adding that war had caused a "shocking disparity of health system capacity" in Yemen. "The lack of testing is a major barrier to even seeing the tip of this global iceberg, let alone its full and devastating scale." Medical workers in southern Yemen told the ABC that some staff had been detained or threatened by authorities for sharing information about the outbreak on social media. "There is no testing capacity and your authorities in the north are hiding the potency indicators," said one medical professional who asked not to be identified for fear of reprisals. "The situation is a disaster, it's devastating." The cap on information has left the public largely unaware of the dangers or reliant on false information about the pandemic. In Aden, health workers said many patients were not coming forward with symptoms due to fears of being locked in the city's isolation centre. One gravedigger said he had never seen such a constant flow of dead  even in a city that has seen multiple bouts of bloody street battles during the civil war. Drone footage seen by the ABC showed mass burials taking place on the outskirts of the city. The Yemeni Government has not enforced widespread lockdown measures, curfews or social distancing to curb the pandemic. "There are no measures taken in the north and very little in the south," a medical professional told the ABC, speaking on condition of anonymity. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. He said large gatherings were still widespread according to local traditions during the Islamic month of Ramadan, while access to patients in many areas was also being hindered by the ongoing conflict. "We have very strong reason to be afraid of the devastating impact of COVID-19 in Yemen," he said. "We are almost losing control all the time  It can be very, very bad for the country and for the population." Meanwhile, at least five hospitals closed in Aden over the past week, as there was no money to pay staff and no protective equipment for workers, he said. Before the outbreak, the country's medical system was already on the verge of collapse after five years of war and widespread famine. There are also fears seasonal outbreaks of cholera, diphtheria and dengue, which occur frequently throughout the country, could further devastate medical resources. 
Record livestock prices are forcing some abattoirs in New South Wales to cancel shifts or shut down operations in the short term. JBS shut down its plant in Scone last Friday due to a shortage of livestock while Southern Meats in Goulburn has shut down its plant this week. The Eastern Young Cattle Indicator (EYCI) hit a record high this week as rainfall around New South Wales and Queensland encouraged producers to hang on to their livestock.  The price of young cattle has doubled in the first two months of 2020 and while a record number of cows and heifers were processed last year slaughter rates are now slowing down significantly. That is creating big problems for the red meat industry and the peak body is now calling for cuts to government charges to help keep the abattoirs running. Trade lamb prices have also surged 25 per cent this year and are now threatening the $10/kg barrier. The sharp rise forced Southern Meats Group to shut down its abattoir in Goulburn this week. CEO Coll MacRury said it was a short-term strategy to help manage costs and avoid them running at a loss. "The prices are just crazy at the moment and  we will continue to be in out and of the market while it remains at this level," he said. Southern Meats will be operating with limited kills next week but the outlook is likely to get even harder for sheep processors.  Rural Bank is forecasting a 45 per cent drop in the slaughter rate heading into winter as producers hang on to their livestock to re-build the flock after the long drought. Mr MacRury confirmed the company's other in Western Australia WAMMCO would continue to operate at this stage. With some abattoirs cutting back shifts or closing abattoirs short term, it is possible that casuals in the industry may lose their jobs.  Patrick Hutchinson, the CEO of the Australian Meat Industry Council, said that would be a big hit to regional economies as the sector employs 40,000 people directly. "They may go to shutting down completely, they may go to three days a week, or two shifts to one shift, there's a number of levers they can pull." He said processors will be cautious about longer shut downs as it can take a long time to get back up to speed again.  Patrick Hutchinson is calling for relief from Federal Government charges as well as cuts to State Government payroll taxes. "We pay about a $100m in export certification fees and on a state base level, what about payroll tax exemption over a two-year period?" "That could save a medium-sized abattoir $1m a year," he said. Mr Hutchinson warned of the consequences for the broader economy if meat processors, Australia's biggest agricultural industry, experienced a downturn. "If it sneezes will the rest of agriculture catch a cold?" ABC News Online readers share how coronavirus is already affecting their work, what impacts it might have and how businesses are preparing for the worst. High prices and short supply of livestock were not the only problems facing the abattoirs. The outbreak of coronavirus has led to a downturn in the chilled export beef market, according to one business operator in southern NSW. Monbeef in Cooma supplies boxed beef throughout Australia and to 26 other countries. Plant manager John Hill said demand had dropped off due to movement restrictions in China and refrigerated and freezer containers were also stuck there. "The export job at the moment has had a downturn because of the coronavirus." "We now have to pre-book shipping containers three and four weeks in advance," he said. "It means we have to plan for the quantities of product down to the last box, or we lose our spot on the vessels." Prices have also softened, he said, but the reduced demand from China may only be temporary. Analysts from Rural Bank estimate that the shortage in protein in China caused by the massive cull of pigs due to the outbreak of African swine fever will probably result in that country importing large volumes of beef instead. While the coronavirus is affecting exports and record prices in Australia is making it tough to source livestock, John Hill said Monbeef in Cooma would stay open. "We're still in full production and hope to be in full production for quite a while." "I think the one thing in our advantage is we are a small plant and we firmly believe we'll be able to source enough cattle to keep up production." "The big priority, is keeping cattle in front of my staff, so we are in production as many days as possible." 
Victorians will be allowed to have up to 20 people in their homes and stay overnight at private residences and tourist accommodation from June 1, under an easing of coronavirus restrictions. Camping will also be allowed at state and national parks, but communal facilities like kitchens and bathrooms will remain closed. Victorians will be able to celebrate weddings with up to 20 people in addition to the celebrant and couple, and up to 50 people at funerals. Up to 20 people will be allowed at other religious ceremonies, in addition to those required to perform the service. "It's not so much about 'stay home', but it is absolutely about 'stay safe'," Premier Daniel Andrews said. In an early concession ahead of the June changes, Victorians will be able to use outdoor playgrounds, skateparks and outdoor gym equipment from Tuesday  the same day some children return to state schools. But those who can work from home will be urged to continue to do so, to prevent the amount of contact that occurs when colleagues share bathrooms, kitchens and office spaces. Mr Andrews said that, along with the cumulative impact of the "cautious easing" of restrictions, would be reassessed in June. "I know it's inconvenient  but if you have been working from home you must keep working from home throughout June," Mr Andrews said. The Premier announced the changes as it was revealed two new cases of COVID-19 were recorded in Victoria overnight. The state's total rose to 1,603, a net increase of one after an earlier case was recorded as a duplicate. Updated Sunday, May 24 The 20-person limit in homes will include members of that household. Mr Andrews said the resumption of overnight stays would be "critically important" to the tourism and hospitality industry, which had been hit hard by the shutdown. "Hotels, motels, other important accommodation venues  particularly in regional Victoria where we know tourism is such an important part, and particularly bushfire-affected communities  that sector will be able to reopen from June 1," he said. Accommodation venues will have to have strict rules in shared spaces. Public libraries, some entertainment and cultural venues and zoos will also be reopened to smaller crowds. Up to 20 people will again be able to swim at pools, while community sport will be allowed to resume with the 20-person cap in undivided spaces, provided physical-distancing measures are observed. Beauty services like nail salons, spas and tattoo parlours will be able to reopen with up to 20 customers per space. They will be required to keep customers' contact details. Mr Andrews last week announced cafes, restaurants and pubs will be open to 20 patrons from June 1, provided physical-distancing guidelines were met. A timeline for the reopening of clubs is not yet known, with Mr Andrews saying it will be difficult to manage physical-distancing rules without seating and with the presence of alcohol. "[Clubs] would have to look very, very different, and it will be a matter of us engaging with that sector to see whether they want to open up under those rules," he said. The Andrews Government has faced criticism for the speed at which restrictions have been eased. Other states allowed broader changes earlier this month. The Premier again linked the gradual lifting of restrictions to the state's aim to prevent the pandemic from getting out of control as it had in countries overseas. "There are examples in other countries where they opened too much, too quickly, and now they've had to reintroduce even tougher rules, even harder lockdowns," he said. "We're doing this in a careful and cautious way, that's the only way to do it." Mr Andrews said the state would look to further relax restrictions from June 22 if transmission rates remained low and testing rates remained high. From that date, indoor fitness and recreation facilities are scheduled to open with up to 20 people per space and up to 10 people per group or activity at any one time. Restaurants, cafes, galleries and museums will then be allowed to host up to 50 people and, for the first time, cinemas and theatres will reopen. "And for those eager to hit the slopes, the ski season will open slightly later this year on June 22," Mr Andrews said. The Premier said all the sectors affected by the announced easing of restrictions would be comprehensively consulted in coming weeks about the precautions needed as life returned to some sense of normality. "If we just have everybody returning to business as usual in those indoor workplaces then we will just see this virus spread and all of our good work will be frittered away," he said. Throughout the announcement, Mr Andrews stressed widespread testing of every Victorian with even the slightest coronavirus symptoms was "critical" to enabling the easing of restrictions. "That's what gives us options," he said. "The more people that get tested, the more options we have to not make changes based on guesswork, but instead to make changes based on what the data is telling us. "With so few community transmissions and so much testing, we are now able to further ease restrictions in many different sectors." Health Minister Jenny Mikakos said the state had undertaken more than 420,000 tests since they began at the start of the year. A target of 150,000 new tests to be completed in the window between the last easing of restrictions on May 13 and the end of the month has already been exceeded, with 174,000 tests one week ahead of schedule. "As we ease, we have to continue testing at record high levels," Mr Andrews said. "If you wait until people start presenting into emergency departments, it is too late." 
Parents whose incomes have been slashed because of the coronavirus pandemic are set to receive financial help from the Queensland Government to get their children back into community sport. Vouchers of $150 will be available for families who can prove the pandemic financial hit, as sporting clubs prepare to return to training and play from June 13 onwards. Sport Minister Mick Di Brenni said many families would struggle to re-enrol their kids into much-loved weekend activities. "This is about making sure that 73,000 households in Queensland that are doing it tough are going to be able to afford to play sport," he said. "Kids have been through a lot in 2020. This has been a really tough time for them. "And giving them the opportunity to get back out on the sporting field, with their friends, is extremely important." The Government will also repurpose more than $50 million of sports funding to get clubs ready to operate under new COVID-19 restrictions. From June 13, sports teams with up to 20 people will be allowed to resume, in line with strict coronavirus restrictions, including non-contact provisions. Full contact sport, and all other activities with larger groups, can resume a month later. All clubs will need to develop COVID-safe plans, which will include the sterilisation of equipment, the use of sanitisation stations, the reduction of spectators, and social distancing on the sidelines through the use of physical barriers in high-population areas. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said the $50m would be given as grants to help clubs get ready for the "new normal". "That includes $2,000 funding grants for up to 7,000 clubs state-wide to buy their cleaning equipment and other essentials," she said. "So, as we carefully start to resume training, sanitising balls, racquets and facilities before and after use is an absolute must to keep everyone and our communities safe." "It gives them time to get their COVID-safe plans in place and so that parents are aware and children as well." Federal guidelines have recommended limits on the number of parents, guardians and onlookers at games, which Ms Palaszczuk has backed. "It is going to be tough but we have to do it," she said. "What we don't want to see is large groups of parents congregating, as does happen on the side of sporting fields. "We really just have to listen to the health advice." 
The coronavirus pandemic has served up a double dose of disappointment for one marriage celebrant from Ballarat in central Victoria. Kate Ritchie, who has presided over ceremonies for 12 years, has not only taken an economic hit from cancelled and postponed ceremonies, but her own wedding to her fiance David, slated for April 9, had to be put on the backburner too. "We had decided it was probably not in the best interest of some of our family members to [carry on with the ceremony]," she said. "I didn't want my wedding to be remembered because Gran got sick or Grandpa got sick. "We had our little cry and then we put on our big girl undies and kept marching on." The couple now hope to exchange their vows early next year. "It's going to be a challenge to fit into that dress," Ms Ritchie said. "It fit me then but I don't think it will fit me after winter. "We're lucky  not many people get to look forward to their wedding twice. "We had months of looking forward to the wedding that was originally organised and now we get that excitement all over again." While the restrictions have forced some of Ms Ritchie's clients to change their wedding plans, she has been grateful the timing of the lockdown only affected the tail end of Ballarat's wedding season. The weddings that Ms Ritchie has officiated during the coronavirus pandemic have been restricted to five people, which included the bride, groom and celebrant.  In Victoria, guest numbers have now been lifted to 10, plus the couple. Bindi Irwin ties the knot at Australia Zoo, just before the Federal Government's restrictions on the number of wedding guests that came into force at midnight. "A lot of extra thinking has gone on  we've got hand sanitiser and wipes for the pens and we've got to stand this far [1.5 metres] away," she said. "Even things like signing documents [have had to be considered]. "It's really hard to show someone where they need to sign the document when you can't get within 1.5 metres of them. "I've never had so many little sticky notes over the documentation." This month the Federal Government announced it was waiving registration fees for celebrants from July 1. Ms Ritchie said the move was a welcome relief for many in her industry. While some treat being a celebrant as a side hustle, many celebrants work full-time in the profession. Bendigo celebrant, Rosemary Taylor, said she had one wedding cancelled, another that went ahead during the lockdown, and a couple of ceremonies rescheduled for next year. She said one couple planned to come down from Brisbane and have the wedding in Bendigo because the bride had family there. "She rang me and said, 'We're going to cancel the whole thing and just have a registry office wedding on the Gold Coast'," Mrs Taylor said. "They just decided to keep it low key. "There are other brides [and grooms] that are just waiting to see and hoping it will be ok." Mrs Taylor has a wedding booked for June 21, but it was still up in the air. "It has [affected business] but it's swings and roundabouts," she said. "I'll probably be twice as busy next year." Where and when you have your wedding in Australia will dictate how many invites you are allowed to send out. The Northern Territory has not specified a limit on outdoor weddings, and in Queensland the current 10-person limit is set to increase to 20 from June 12 and up to 100 from July 10. West Australian weddings can have up to 20 people inside or 30 people outside. Ten guests can also attend a wedding in New South Wales right now, not including the couple, celebrant and photographer. Victoria has a similar rule; 10 guests plus the couple and celebrant and the same applies in Tasmania. The Australian Capital Territory also has a 10-person rule for weddings but it differs slightly in that the number includes the couple, but does not include the celebrant and photographer. South Australia also includes the couple in their 10-person limit but not the celebrant or "necessary staff". 
The Northern Territory Government has confirmed restrictions on travel within the NT will be lifted on June 5. Chief Minister Michael Gunner said the Biosecurity Act  limiting travel to remote communities  would be removed almost two weeks ahead of schedule after consultation with land councils and traditional owners. "We can lift our biosecurity zones safely because of our strict border controls. It's been weeks since we've had a new case, and Territorians are doing the right thing," Mr Gunner wrote on Facebook. "I know it hasn't been easy, but soon, Territorians will be able to move freely between communities and come into town and return home again without having to quarantine." Mr Gunner said the NT's interstate travel restrictions would remain in place indefinitely and the Queensland, WA and South Australian borders would stay closed. The Biosecurity Act was originally due to expire on June 18, but land councils lobbied strongly for the restrictions to lift on June 5  the same day as stage-three coronavirus restriction easing in the Northern Territory. In advocating the June 5 date, Central Land Council chief executive Joe Martin-Jard said the isolation of residents in remote communities was creating barriers to essential supplies, including warm clothing. "We don't want to see double standards emerging where people could get a laksa at Parap Markets and have a bet at the pub from June 5, but the community mob are still locked in," Mr Martin-Jard said. The NT Government moved swiftly to restrict access to remote communities, where Indigenous populations suffer disproportionate levels of chronic disease that are risk factors for coronavirus. Following the announcement of relaxed travel restrictions within the Territory, the NT Government launched a tourism initiative encouraging residents to "get out and enjoy their backyard". Tourism Minister Lauren Moss said the $200,000 campaign dubbed 'Time to be a Territorian' would nudge NT residents to spend on local holidays and provide operators with some relief from the multi-million-dollar revenue blackhole left due to interstate and international border closures. "Over the last few months we've sacrificed a lot to keep Territorians safe. We've looked out for each other, and now we need to keep looking out for each other by experiencing as much of our own backyard as we can," Ms Moss said. "Following[the] announcement thatbiosecurity restrictionswill be removed from5 June, we are encouraging locals to begin planning experiences like a fishing charter, a water cruise, a cultural experience or an overnight stay, which are crucial to supporting our tourism sector. "It's still going to be incredibly tough, because obviously we have a smaller population in the Territory, but I think this will help tour operators adapt to what the new normal looks like for them." Ms Moss said she believed remote communities would "welcome the opportunity to travel freely around the NT and welcome people back into their communities". "We know that land councils and traditional owners have been working with both levels of government on the lifting of biosecurity zones," she said. 
Keiran Lusk feels strangely liberated by living in coronavirus enforced isolation in outback Queensland. He mows the law in his undies if he feels like it, plays loud music and lifts rocks to keep fit  and couldn't care less what people think about him. He and his young family have paused an epic road trip in a renovated bus to sit out the pandemic as caretakers of a remote property, almost 750 kilometres west of Brisbane. "Living in isolation has provided me with a unique opportunity to be myself," he said. "I am happier and more at peace with myself than I've been in years." With no confirmed coronavirus cases in the region, no neighbours and no visitors, they are far from the stress and anxiety of illness, lockdowns and movement restrictions. "It does feel very surreal out here, we're not affected in anyway, I almost feel a little bit guilty," he said. "It's a very special place to ride out a pandemic, you couldn't ask for better." Mr Lusk is no stranger to isolation. He spent five years living on Moreton Island off the coast of Brisbane, working as a park ranger on the third biggest sand island in the world. "It's like the lighthouse  it's the same sort of remoteness out here," he said. "We actually feel like we're living a similar sort of life that we lived on the island." Mr Lusk spent two years converting an old bus into a mobile home and late last year he and his wife Sam sold up and the family hit the road. "We've been on the road in Bronte the bus for over six months now," he said. "In recent months, we've been slowly plodding around western Queensland and free camping by outback rivers and little country towns, but our plans changed somewhat with the emergence of COVID-19, travel restrictions and nationwide lockdowns. "With no home to return to and camping areas, parks and reserves closing, we were fortunate to find somewhere nearby to stop for a while." They are now caretaking a remote homestead west of Charleville, called Lass O'Gowrie. "We're maintaining the beautiful gardens  it had a prize-winning garden, beautiful lush lawns, it's like an oasis," Mr Lusk said. "We're growing veggies, we've got lots of space and room to move. "The house hasn't got any furniture, but we don't care.  "We're living in the bus at the front door and the boys have got a dedicated Lego room, dedicated Monopoly and games rooms in the house  it's great. "It's wonderfully safe  if it wasn't for the flies we might live here forever." Mr Lusk is conscious that things could have been very different for his family if they had still been in Brisbane during the coronavirus pandemic. "I speak to friends and family in Brisbane, and I guess they're seeing the first hand results of the employment crisis and people that are out of work and shops that are closed  we don't see any of those impacts out here," he said. He said their days had taken on a particular rhythm. Mr Lusk is home-schooling his two boys while his wife works remotely as a public servant. "We're old hands at home-schooling  I wouldn't say that makes us good though," he said, laughing. "It's a lot of work, but having the kids around 24/7 it's wonderful quality time and it's really beautiful to be able to watch the boys develop and spend time with them every day." While reluctant to offer advice on how to deal with life in isolation, Mr Lusk said he had some strategies that had been working for him during these strange times. Be kind to yourself "As someone who has struggled with anxiety and depression over the years, the current opportunity to live in almost complete isolation has been strangely beneficial for me," he said. "I'm learning to be kind to myself. It is OK to have good days and it's OK to have not-so-good days." Have a routine "We are creatures of habit and enjoy having a routine and this has been particularly important," he said. Enjoy being yourself "Living in isolation has provided me with a unique opportunity to be myself, without the fear of others judging me, which is something I've struggled with all my life," he said. "If I want to water the veggie garden or mow the lawn in my undies, then I do it, although this strategy may not work so well for city folk. "Just find time to do the things that make you happy." Exercise "I've set myself a goal to come out of this isolation period feeling much more fit and healthy," he said. "Some mornings I get up early and take a solo ride on my bike around the property. "I'm also exercising with rocks each day  I call it 'rocksercising'  and have a pair of rocks outside the front door and whenever I leave the bus to go anywhere, I do some weights with my rocks as I walk." Sunshine "There is something magic about getting a little bit of sunshine each day," he said. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Mr Lusk said the family would get back on the road in the coming months. "I think we're keen to continue our travels when it is safe and when we're welcome to do so," he said. "This is just a staging ground where we can ride out the crisis and, when travel restrictions are lifted and towns are ready to welcome visitors back, we'll hit the road again." He said he knew his family were "incredibly lucky and fortunate to be where we are during this time". "We do appreciate how privileged we are to be in this situation too  it's not something that we're gloating about or feeling boastful," he said.  "I guess we're just very appreciative of the circumstances that we've found ourselves in". 
The themes of safety and isolation feature in the artwork of two Queensland students who have documented their drastically changed world during COVID-19.  Year 12 student Lateisha Hurst, 17, created illustrations for her school yearbook combining native birds and symbols of the pandemic such as masks and hand sanitiser. Meanwhile, art student Ben Watson, 19, photographed both himself and his grandparents wearing personal protective equipment for his university assignment.  Lateisha, a vice captain at Noosa District State High School, remembers clearly the moment COVID-19 turned her world upside down. "It was on the news, and then the next day I went to work [at a local supermarket] and I had to change everything I was doing," she said. "We had to wipe down the benches after every customer and make sure we were all sanitised so we didn't pass [the virus] on to anyone."  Then school closed and Lateisha was navigating online learning and separated from her friends. "It was really hard  it was all online and we had to relearn everything  it was a big change," she said. "And I really liked hanging out with my friends. "It's a big part of who I am, so that was hard." Lateisha said returning to school was "one of the best feelings". "Just getting back to all my friends was a big part of that, and probably because everyone was in it together," she said. When she drew illustrations for the school's 2020 yearbook, titled Yali, which means "to call" in the local Gubbi Gubbi dialect, she captured the memories of COVID-19. "When we look back on our yearbook, we can think, 'Wow, all this actually happened'," Lateisha said. "I thought it was important to have a statement on the impact of COVID on our community, and how it's also affecting the environment. "We've seen so many animals that have come out into new places where they haven't before because of how populated those areas are. "So it's been a big change not for just the community but also for our wildlife." Lateisha said her main "takeaway" from living through the global pandemic was to see people could be more considerate of each other. "We have seen people working together and actually thinking about other people, where before COVID it wasn't as much," she said. Lateisha said the pandemic experience has made her determined to achieve her dreams of becoming a primary school teacher when high school ends. "I want to help people," she said. Creating a lasting visual record of the pandemic also became the focus for University of the Sunshine Coast (USC) photography students. Lecturer in photography, Tricia King, said her students had to quickly adapt a photo documentary project that was meant to be a narrative shadowing someone as the weeks went on. "At the start of the year, they could have photographed anything in the world but [as COVID struck] they have a very restricted pool of subjects," she said.  "So, we have actually documented the change in just a few weeks from going outside, to taking photos from the car only, to not going outside at all." Capturing history as it happened was a deeply personal project for 19-year-old USC student, Ben Watson. Over a period of three weeks he documented the change in his grandparents' daily lives during isolation, photographing them safely through windows, or wearing personal protection equipment and using a zoom lens to maintain a safe social distance inside the home. His images captured the additional care his grandmother has been giving his grandfather with dementia. "My grandma could no longer go out and do leisure activities or invite visitors home," Mr Waton said. "She had to stop carers coming to the house  she didn't want herself or my grandpa in contact from the coronavirus. "It's a very different world." Mr Watson said as a result of the social restrictions his grandfather's behaviours had altered a lot. "This was a very big change in my grandpa's routine," he said. "Now he spends a lot more time in his room alone." With restrictions easing, Mr Watson can now visit his grandparents without a mask but his images of their time in isolation have become a powerful and personal record of a historic time. The project has also fuelled his creative ambitions. "I put my heart and soul into this project," he said.  "My plan is to do something with photography when I graduate, like more photojournalism work." 
It belongs amid the ruins of a war-torn city, or in a rural village grappling with the horrors of famine. Instead, it sits on a suburban cricket field, in the heart of an affluent city, in one of the richest and most developed nations on Earth. It was built to prop up a healthcare system, facing a test for which it was not prepared. But the pop-up emergency department, constructed in just 37 days beside the Canberra Hospital on Garran Oval, will now likely sit idle and may never see a patient. According to the decision-makers who commissioned the $23 million project, it was an insurance policy, taken out as they faced an escalating health crisis both across the globe and within Australia. And they say that as the call was made, they feared it might already be too little, too late. To understand why the facility was built, we need to think back just eight weeks. The idea was first raised on March 20, and a decision was made to push ahead with building the facility on March 22. ACT Health Minister Rachel Stephen-Smith said politicians were watching case numbers soar, nationwide. "In Australia  we were starting to get really increased numbers of COVID-19 cases, day on day," she said. "And we were on that exponential part of the curve of COVID-19 cases." Advice was being handed to National Cabinet around what sort of capacity might be needed, which was then being passed on to state and territory health systems to transform into reality. Hospital capacity, particularly in intensive care, would in some cases need to double or even triple. Maps were drawn outlining how capacity could be extended across the ACT's health system, but Ms Stephen-Smith said they knew time was not a luxury they could afford. "What we had seen in other countries around the world was, by time they needed to make decisions to expand their health system capacity, it was too late," she said. "They were already overwhelmed. "It was really clear to us that we could not afford to be in that situation, that we had to ensure that our health system would have the capacity to cope with what we saw potentially coming down the track." And she, along with counterparts across the country, feared they may have already been caught out. "I think at that time I, and health ministers around the country, and first ministers, were extremely concerned that it was already too late," she said. "That all of the measures we were putting in place wouldn't be quick enough to actually flatten that curve, and that we would see hundreds and thousands of cases of COVID-19 in each of our major cities." Inside the health system, by late March, the global coronavirus situation was already having a clear impact locally. Supply chains for critical medical equipment were breaking down world-wide, and Canberra staff were anxious. Ordinary surgical masks, which usually cost 17 cents, skyrocketed in price to over $1. And where you could usually order as many as needed, and have them delivered in less than 24 hours, orders were being placed with no confidence as to when they might arrive. Deputy CEO of Canberra Health Services Dave Peffer said those were the circumstances decisions were being made in, and no one knew what was coming next. "Things were moving so rapidly that at that point in time, the uncertainty was so great, you really had to plan for what could potentially be a catastrophe," he said. Aspen Medical was contracted to build a pop-up emergency facility, and Garran Oval  directly across the road from Canberra Hospital  was identified as the best possible site. It would be 51 beds, and act as an emergency ward dedicated to both suspected and confirmed COVID-19 patients. On April 2, the facility was publicly announced, and fences were erected around where the site would stand. A total of $23 million was budgeted for the construction and operation, and the ACT Government would take ownership of the facility and all equipment. The World Health Organisation was consulted during the design and construction phase for advice. As an emergency department, it would both treat and triage patients  with all patients leaving within 24 hours, either discharged or admitted to another ward of the hospital. Among the 51 beds, six were equipped for resuscitation, and one for palliative care. Mr Peffer said as they looked abroad, it seemed like exactly the sort of facility that might be required. "We had health services around the world, good health services, crumbling under the weight of a pandemic," he said. "And the lessons we took away from that is often it was governments moving too slowly. "Where we had a situation with health services being underprepared, under resourced, and then very quickly overwhelmed. "The decision that was taken here was we weren't going to follow that path." The field hospital was assembled with extraordinary speed, and made from parts that could eventually be pulled apart and stored in shipping containers. The keys were handed to Canberra Health Services this week, but, beyond security guards, it largely sits empty. Beds line the halls and curtains hang from the roof, while a small array of medical equipment sits on shelves. Were it to be needed, it would take another three weeks to activate  with staff, gear, medicine and other necessities to be brought online. With no active cases of coronavirus in the ACT, that now seems unlikely. Instead, the hospital will probably be disassembled at the end of the flu season, packed up and sold to whoever needs it next. It is, undoubtedly, an expensive insurance policy. If it is not activated, the final cost will come in around $14 million, rather than $23 million. It is also unusual. Few similar facilities are being built around Australia, although the ACT Government pointed to a project at Monash Hospital in Victoria as an example. Despite this, Ms Stephen-Smith said it was the right response. "This is a global pandemic of the size that we haven't seen for 100 years, and it wouldn't be reasonable to build a health system with enough capacity to respond to a once in 100-year pandemic, and then have it sitting there empty for most of the time," she said. "That actually wouldn't be a good way to manage the public's resources and to plan in our health system." 
As Liz McLeod looks back on the past 12 weeks, she feels as though she has been given the gift of time. She watched as a never-before-seen virus broke out and began to spread across the world, killing at first hundreds, then thousands of people as it edged closer and closer to Western Australia. She was about to face a massive professional upheaval. Latest information from the WA Health Department Mrs McLeod was pulled from her role as chief executive of the East Metropolitan Health Service and found herself in a newly-created role  the chief executive of COVID Health Operations.  This made her the head of the team responsible for making sure Western Australia's hospitals and health system were ready for whatever COVID-19 brought with it. And that was a whole lot of unknowns. "One of the challenges we had in this whole process has really been a lack of modelling of what we were going to expect," she says. "It's been quite a moving plan in terms of understanding how many people we thought were going to be coming to our hospitals and also when they were going to be coming." Like the rest of the world, Mrs McLeod saw images of hospitals being overwhelmed in China, Italy and New York. She saw countries running out of hospital equipment like life-saving ventilators, while medical staff were rationing PPE (personal protective equipment). It was now her job to make sure those scenes weren't repeated in Western Australia.  "We were always thinking we were two weeks away from a very large surge of patients arriving," she says. WA hospitals have an emergency plan that is updated regularly, but Mrs McLeod says it was quickly evident that COVID-19 was a different beast and preparations would have to be unlike anything West Australians had seen. "What we knew was that COVID spreads quickly and we get that exponential growth in people with COVID," she says. Early advice for her team was to triple the state's hospital emergency department capacity and double the number of intensive care beds. "We had to work hard and we had to work fast to be as ready as we could be," she says. By March 10, WA had six confirmed cases of the virus and special COVID clinics were set up to test people returning from overseas who had flu-like symptoms. "We were all obviously watching the news and looking to our international colleagues and the evidence of what was happening internationally," Mrs McLeod says. COVID Health Operations, Mrs McLeod's team, made the decision to prepare 660 ICU beds  four times Western Australia's regular capacity. A few days later, as West Australians hit the supermarkets and began panic-buying groceries, her team was busy scrambling to purchase more ventilators for those beds. "Along with being busier in our hospitals, we were also expecting that more of our staff would have been impacted as well," she says When health staff began to fall ill and, in some cases, die overseas, they realised they could have an even bigger challenge on their hands. In anticipation, they launched a statewide recruitment drive. West Australians answered that call in their thousands  more than 7,000 of them applied. By the last week of March, WA was recording between 20 and 44 cases a day and the curve was going up. Her team was working around the clock, long days that bled into weeks.  But then, Western Australia turned a corner. On March 24, WA closed its interstate border and, by the start of April, even travel within the state was restricted. Along with 14-day quarantine periods introduced for people coming into the state, it meant rates of infection began to slow. WA has closed its borders to the east for the first time in history. Here's how you might be affected. "We were certainly expecting it to be a lot busier than what eventuated," Mrs McLeod says. By the start of May, WA had recorded its first full week with no new coronavirus cases. "We look back at it and it has been an extraordinary effort  the fantastic public health response and the fantastic response of the public has given us the gift of time," she says. Fortunately for Mrs McLeod and her team, the elusive two-week surge has still not eventuated. But that doesn't mean her team will rest easy.  "I think we're winning, but I don't think we're there yet. We've still got a long way to go  this is a marathon, not a sprint," she says. Western Australia started to ease more restrictions from May 18, with people allowed back into pubs, cafes and gyms, students heading back to school and some intrastate borders reopened.  Here's a guide to help you work out what will be allowed from May 18 and what is still offlimits. Now hospitals remain on alert for a second wave of infection. "We are still expecting there to be cases so we will maintain our alertness and readiness for some time," Mrs McLeod says. It's that gift of time she speaks of that has allowed her team to get ahead of demand and even update their emergency plans.  "We have to balance our optimism with caution, so we have to remain vigilant and remain ready to respond," she says. While a vaccination for COVID-19 remains a distant promise, she has one message for the people of WA. "We haven't finished yet, I think we are still only in the early days of COVID." 
For many Australians, eating fruit and vegetables is a tough sell. Government data shows only 7 per cent of adults and 5 per cent of children eat sufficient serves of vegetables, while half of adults and two-thirds of children eat enough fruit. A new national body has been established to change our consumption habits and help the farmers who grow fresh produce. The Fruit and Vegetable Consortium is made up of 11 members including Nutrition Australia, AUSVEG, the Cancer Council of Victoria and various government bodies. Its chair, Lucinda Hancock, said there was a need for a consolidated national approach. "There's been a number of peak bodies in their own rights, however what hasn't happened is a collaboration between health research and also the vegetable industry and market authority," she said. "Really, that's been the missing piece which I think is absolutely vital. "If we don't pull together, I think the success of a campaign is minimal, hence why we really need the group." Ms Hancock said she believed Australians were confused over what to do with vegetables. "I think that for a lot of people, cooking skills are lacking and in the era of Uber Eats, a lot more people are eating takeaway, so they don't know how to prepare, store or what to do with leftovers," she said. "There's a perceived cost with vegetables and, of course, taste preference  people just don't naturally love vegetables." James Whiteside, chief executive of AUSVEG, agreed there was an issue with getting Australians to eat fruit and veg. "Our fruit consumption is a lot better than our vegetable consumption," he said. "We don't appreciate the nutritional value enough, even though we're told that they're good for us. "We're not good at creatively finding delicious ways to eat the product. "In some cases, there's a perception they're labour-intensive and require some effort to cook, which is not necessarily the case." The consortium hopes to address other factors affecting consumer habits, including cost, availability and supply. "Our plan would be to ensure that vegetables are available, and if we're in a really good position with the campaign with increased demand, hopefully we can also advocate to government to subsidise the cost of more expensive vegetables," Ms Hancock said. "What's really important is everybody has a right to consume vegetables equally and should be able to afford them." The campaign, while still in the works, hopes to have similar success to the Life Be In It and Slip, Slop, Slap commercials, and the more recent Eat Australian Lamb ads by the Meat and Livestock Australia. "These campaigns have perennially changed how we we behave  that's the sort of investment that you need to make," Mr Whiteside said. "It's probably going to take a period of five to seven years." In recent months, producers have reported an increase in demand for home-delivered fruit and vegetable boxes, particularly organic produce. Although Australia doesn't have a clear definition to certify organic produce, organic farming is known to use no man-made fertilisers, pesticides, growth regulators or livestock feed additives. Kristen Ottaway, who runs an organic online supermarket, said her business gathered produce from 22 farmers and delivered it throughout Brisbane. "We were sitting at around about 300 to 350 boxes a week before COVID hit, and then we skyrocketed to about 800 boxes a week overnight," Ms Ottaway said. While the surge was encouraging, farmers have seen demand steady as the pandemic goes on. Anthony Bauer, one of the country's largest suppliers of organic vegetables, said he recorded a large increase in demand in March. "When coronavirus hit, we had up to 400 per cent growth in the first few weeks, then it obviously settled down," he said. "We're maintaining now 30 per cent growth." Mr Bauer said he welcomed the introduction of the consortium. "We definitely need it. We need consumers to be putting more focus, more value, on fruit and veg," he said. "It's an important part of everyone's life and everyone's diet."  Watch this story on ABC TV's Landline at 12:30pm or oniview. 
There are more than 100 coronavirus vaccines in the pipeline and almost a dozen that have made it to human trials so far. But which one  if any  will be the panacea to the COVID-19 pandemic is still anyone's guess. Researchers working to develop a SARS-CoV-2 vaccine face a unique and significant set of challenges  not to mention the fact they're trying to do it in record time. While it will be some months before we know whether any of the proposed vaccines are effective, initial safety trials and encouraging animal studies show promising early signs. Let's take a closer look at some of the candidates leading the race (remembering those that make it to clinical trials first will not necessarily be the most effective). A quick recap, according to the World Health Organization, as of May 24. While vaccine developers typically follow a linear sequence (pre-clinical animal studies to Phase 1/2/3/4 human trials), the urgency of COVID-19 means many are speeding up their timelines. In some cases, Phase 1 and 2 trials are being squashed together (testing safety and effectiveness of the vaccine at the same time), or Phase 1 human safety trials are running before animal efficacy data is in. This week, all eyes were on an experimental vaccine produced by American biotech company Moderna  the first coronavirus vaccine to be tested in humans back in March.  On Monday, the biotech firm announced its RNA vaccine, which was given to 45 healthy individuals in a Phase 1 trial, appeared to be safe and promote an immune response against COVID-19. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Unlike more traditional vaccines, which contain a weakened version of the actual virus or portions of it, Moderna's vaccine is based on a new technology that involves taking genetic material from the virus and delivering it to healthy cells. Using messenger RNA (or mRNA), the vaccine carries instructions to the body to create the SARS-CoV-2 protein the vaccine is aiming to protect against. The idea is that the body detects the genetic material and new protein as foreign, and mounts an immune response  producing antibodies that learn to remember and fight the virus if the body encounters it again. Without publishing its findings in full, Moderna said preliminary data of eight people in its trial showed participants developed neutralising antibodies (which stop the virus replicating) at levels similar to people who have recovered from COVID-19. The findings, though limited, sent the company's share price soaring. But it later dropped when Medical news website STAT reported the figures "don't mean much on their own, because critical information  was withheld", including information about the other 37 trial participants. Like all vaccine candidates, Moderna's findings need to be repeated in much larger Phase 2 (and eventually Phase 3) clinical trials to prove the vaccine actually works. These are expected to begin soon. Meanwhile, two other genetic vaccines for COVID-19 have also made it to human trials  one from American biotech firm Inovio, and another jointly developed by pharmaceutical giant Pfizer and German company BioNTech. Inovio, which has enrolled 40 people in a phase 1 trial of its DNA vaccine, is expected to publish its results in early June. Pfizer, on the other hand, has begun delivering doses of its RNA vaccine to 360 volunteers in the US as part of a Phase 1/2 trial. The drug maker and its German partner said if the vaccine proved to be safe and effective, it could potentially be ready for US distribution by the end of the year. Kylie Quinn, a vice-chancellor's research fellow at RMIT University, said although genetic vaccines are relatively easy and inexpensive to produce, none have been approved for human use before. "We don't know how they're going to perform in humans, but the advantage of them is that they are very quick in terms of design and manufacturing, and should be relatively safe," said Dr Quinn. Using an entirely different approach, scientists at Oxford University's Jenner Institute recently announced a coronavirus vaccine they are working on appears to be protective in monkeys. The vaccine is already being tested in humans. According to a preliminary research paper  which has not yet been peer-reviewed  the vaccine candidate provided protection in six rhesus macaque monkeys who were vaccinated and then exposed to high levels of SARS-CoV-2. The animals had less of the virus in their lungs and airways when compared to non-vaccinated animals, and were protected from developing pneumonia. Oxford's vaccine candidate is known as a viral vector vaccine, and is one of several being developed for COVID-19. These vaccines work by introducing a different type of virus that is engineered to include proteins of the virus the vaccine is aiming to protect against. "You basically take a virus that is generally harmless but can infect cells and you use it like a trojan horse," Dr Quinn said. For the Oxford vaccine, a genetically modified version of a common cold virus (known as an adenovirus) from chimpanzees is being used to carry a protein from SARS-CoV-2 to the body. The goal is to stimulate an immune response and prime the body to respond to any future infection. Unlike most other vaccines, which begin with small clinical trials to demonstrate safety, this vaccine was fast-tracked because the research team had already tested very similar vaccines in humans for other viruses, including MERS and Ebola. Researchers hope to test the vaccine on more than 6,000 people in the UK by the end of May, as part of a Phase 1/2 trial. If those results show the vaccine is effective, they say the first few million doses could be available as soon as September, with emergency approval from regulators. Trevor Drew, director of CSIRO's Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness, said the decision by British drug-maker AstraZeneca to partner with Oxford to manufacture and distribute the vaccine was an encouraging sign. "The Oxford vaccine is really quite a clever one," Professor Drew said. "I think it's probably going to be one of the prime candidates." Besides Oxford, one other viral vector vaccine has made it to human trials. It comes from Chinese vaccine company CanSino. While CanSino is yet to publish detailed results of its Phase 1 trial, its vaccine candidate was the first to reach Phase 2 clinical trials back in April. Three of the remaining vaccines to have made it to human trials are "inactivated" vaccines, which means they contain the actual virus, but it's been killed by being exposed to ultraviolet light or chemicals. "This is a really simple and sometimes very effective way of introducing your immune system to something without having the potential to cause disease," Dr Quinn said. "It's a very old style of vaccine." Inactivated vaccines are slightly different to live attentuated vaccines, which involve introducing a "live" virus into the body, but one that has been weakened. Just a handful of COVID-19 vaccine candidates are using this approach, all still in pre-clinical trials. The three inactivated vaccines that have made it to human trials are being developed in China and are in Phase 1/2 clinical trials, however data from the initial phase 1 trials is limited. One of the vaccine candidates, developed by Chinese biopharmaceutical company Sinovac, was recently shown to be effective in rhesus macaque monkeys, who  like in the Oxford vaccine study  generated neutralising antibodies. "It builds the case that [this vaccine] is possibly viable and worth following up on," Dr Quinn said. The final type of vaccine researchers are pursuing are called subunit or protein vaccines. These contain only a fragment of the virus, rather than the whole thing. US biotech company Novavax recently begun Phase 1 clinical trials in Australia with a subunit vaccine that targets the "spike" protein on the surface of coronvirus particles. It's the same technique being pursued by researchers at the University of Queensland, who are set to begin clinical trials in July. There are pros and cons to every vaccine approach, and it may be that multiple candidates are found to show some protection against COVID-19. No vaccine is 100 per cent effective, and the vast majority of vaccines that make it to clinical trials do not succeed in getting to market. Given the challenges of manufacturing and distributing a vaccine on a global scale, Dr Quinn said it wouldn't be a bad outcome if several candidates were ultimately used. Get the latest health news and information from across the ABC. "Different vaccines have very specific manufacturing requirements," she said. "So perhaps having a few different vaccine formats that each show a level of protecting  we can spread the weight across different manufacturing facilities." Professor Drew said because the COVID-19 vaccine development timeline was being compressed, and some of the longer-term effects would be unknown, the decision to roll it out  if an effective vaccine was found  would likely be based on each country's individual level of risk. "How urgent is the vaccine needed, and what are the potential benefits against some of the more minor risks?" he said. "In the current situation with COVID-19, a lot of those decisions may be made with the acceptance [that] there may be some minor downstream issues, but certainly no worse than the current suffering that's being created by the disease itself."  
When Michael Roach first took over The Book Cellar in Tasmania's Campbell Town, he never thought a cookbook written in 1930 would be a bestseller. His book store, almost hidden off the typically bustling Midland Highway, is located underground in the convict cellars of heritage property Foxhunters Return, an 1830's-era coaching inn. Pride of place in the store's entry, surrounded by original sandstone walls, sits the bestsellers list, one of which is Alice Irvine's Central Cookery Book. "Since the coronavirus shutdowns, it's been our most popular book," Michael said. It's now in its 16th edition and is a cooking staple for many Tasmanian households. "It's very well known in the Tasmanian community", said Mr Roach. "A lot of parents have sent their children off with a copy when they leave home and I think that tradition has continued and pushed forward a bit during the crisis because people are returning to the basics." It's also recently gained an appetite internationally. "We've sold copies recently to Hawaii, of all places. In one weekend we sold a few online over there, which is great," he said. "What makes it interesting is this book has no pictures, it's very basic, it's a starter cookbook. "Some of the recipes include how to boil an egg, how to do the most basic things that the big cookbooks just dont touch. "It's not uncommon for people to buy several copies at once and send them off to grandchildren and that sort of thing." During the 1970s, it was a key text in Tasmanian classrooms. Ena Rigney has been teaching home economics in Launceston for 17 years and has fond memories of using the book at home as a child. "I grew up with the Central Cookery Book, it was one of the very few recipe books we had at home: being a Dutch migrant, recipe books were scarce," she said. "It was the one I used at school while studying and it has become a favourite of mine over the years. "It's how I learned to cook and I still use it while teaching my classes now. "I can probably recall 20 recipes from the book off the top of my head that I still use. "The simplicity chocolate cake, for example, was always a wonderful, easy-to-make chocolate cake because it was a melt-and-mix method and not many are a melt-and-mix method nowadays." Janelle Scott has worked alongside Ena for almost a decade at Launceston Church Grammar School and has similar memories of using the cookbook. "It's been a great, trusted recipe book, all of the recipes have been tested, which is really good to know. I still use the book as a reference in my classes," she said. "It's almost 90 years old and it's still a Tasmanian classic." "All the recipes are heart-warming, easy to understand and the ingredients aren't expensive for families." Janelle said one reason for its continued popularity over the years is people referring back to it to find an old recipe their grandparents or relatives used to make. "If people have memories of certain meals they ate when they were younger, for example, this book would probably be a good starting point to find out how it was made," she said. According to the Department of Education, the Central Cookery Book has been updated since it was first published by a group of Tasmanian teachers. The Department said it's no longer a set text in classrooms but is referred to along with a range of other books and online resources. Adriana Taylor, from the Country Women's Association, said it's understandable people are reaching for easy and familiar recipes during the pandemic. "There's a level of comfort in home cooking, using fresh produce from your garden and making a meal to share with your family or friends is really special," she said. "I hope people will have a lot more confidence in themselves once COVID-19 ends, in being able to get an easy meal ready quickly and easily and also just things like breakfasts, anyone can really do smashed avocado on toast." "Now people will be able to make decent pasta and pasta sauces. I hope people will continue to cook at home." Mother-of-two Cassandra Sheehan is one of many Tasmanians who've been spending more time cooking. "I used to bake before this period but we've definitely been doing more recently," she said. "My daughter wanted to make a Boston bun like the bakery, so we did a Boston bun, we've done bread, home-made pizza bases, things for the kids' lunches: muffins, cakes, a lot of experimenting. It's been fun, the kids love it!" "I think everyone should give it a go, you get a lot of enjoyment out of it. I do still call mum and ask 'how do you do such-and-such?', but that's all part of it." Alice Christina Irvine was born in the mining town of Mathinna in 1879. According to records from the Tasmanian Honour Roll of Women, she was educated at Mangana State School and began her career as a teacher at Mathinna State School in 1897. In 1906, Alice attended the Melbourne Training College as a cookery student and in 1926 attended the Emily MacPherson College of Domestic Economy in Melbourne. Upon her return to Tasmania, Alice started writing a text for cookery education. First published around 1930, the Central Cookery Book was intended for use in Tasmanian domestic science classes. It's now become one of the most published and widely utilised texts in Tasmania. Miss Irvine died in November 1940 from cancer. She was inducted into the Tasmanian Honour Roll of Women in 2009 for services to Education and Training. 
Beef is among the growing list of industries dealing with ramifications of the coronavirus, with the sector experiencing export bans, increased freight costs and a significant drop in overseas demand. AgForce says there has been a noticeable shift in the perception of the agricultural sector in favour of producers and farmers Josie and Blair Angus run 35,000 head of cattle on their property near Moranbah, 200 kilometres south-west of Mackay in central Queensland. They sell beef to 30 countries across the world. "Uncertainty is probably the best way to describe it  and volatility," Ms Angus said. "We had the hunger games at the start, where domestically the retail demand appeared insatiable, and I guess we've obviously had chain disruptions around air trade internationally. "It's been patchy and interesting and I think, now moving forward, the uncertainty is probably the biggest factor." The abattoir where the Anguses were sending some of their stock was one of the four impacted by China's banned exports, but that was not the only market affecting their business.  The couple supply beef to restaurants, butchers and wholesalers across Australia and overseas. "We've seen massive impacts in the Middle East, for instance, where we had a focus on the UAE and Dubai and such a heavy tourist influenced economy," Ms Angus said. "We've seen a massive drop-off in demand there. "Now we've just got that longer-term bit of uncertainty; where's this all going to end?" In a silver lining to the pandemic, domestic demand for beef has surged. Peter Boodle is a butcher in Rockhampton and he lost 50 per cent of trade to local restaurants and cafes when they were forced to shut their doors.  But consistent demand to put food on the table has turned that around. "Since the coronavirus started we were a little bit worried  but we're actually up in sales," Mr Boodle said. "Even though our wholesale and restaurant trade is down 50 per cent, our retail is up 50 [per cent] as well. "We're actually doing better than what we were before coronavirus started." Mr Boodle put the increase in retail demand down to people getting more creative in the kitchen as they looked to make nicer meals at home. "They're becoming their own chefs, they're asking for better cuts," he said. "Our customer count's probably up around 400 customers a week." Terry Nolan is the director of a cattle processing facility near Gympie in south-east Queensland. He said he has seen a strong increase in business because of the coronavirus restrictions. "In our business about 60 to 70 per cent is for the Australian and domestic market and Australian retail trade," Mr Nolan said. "There's an increase in retail trade, and it's probably no surprise that people out here have sought comfort food. "I would say, in those first two weeks of lockdown [from] mid-March to [the] end of March, some retailers would have doubled their sale of meat which is a great story for the beef industry." He said a lot of producers have not felt the brunt of the pandemic yet because of the length of the supply chain in the cattle industry. "To some degree they've been insulated to the COVID effect," Mr Nolan said. "There may be a lag time down the track and who knows with the talk of China. "Hopefully that's only [a] temporary suspension of those plants and we can be back going there in six months. "But it's a long and complex supply chain and lots of people are impacted at different times." AgForce cattle board chair, Will Wilson, said the industry was in a rebuild phase following drought, meaning the current situation was good for producers. "It's a supply and demand market  so while we're building supply, the demand is high and that's been noticeable and good for producers as far as value proposition goes," he said. Mr Wilson says while the international export industry is uncertain, producers are taking it as it comes. "At the end of the day it's just a volatile situation for [the] market so we'll see what happens in the future," he said. Mr Wilson said another positive of the pandemic for the agricultural sector has been a shift in perception of the industry from the broader community. "It really seems now people are concerned about where their next feed is going to come from and what's important to them," he said. "As an industry it's no secret that we've been struggling to deliver the message that we do care about our land and our animals  this has been a real assistance in getting that message across. "You actually get an opportunity to prove you are doing your best to feed the world, and look after the animals and the land." 
For many families, the evening meal during the month of Ramadan is a time of joy and reflection spent with friends and family.  Prayers at packed mosques, warm hugs and mouth-watering foods a traditional centrepiece.  Muslims across Australia are breaking their day-long fasts differently this year because of coronavirus  and a food deployment operation is helping members of the community who are struggling.  Yusra Metwally is a few hours into her fast as she packs eggs into a food hamper going out with others to Western Sydney suburbs.  The box is halal-friendly and specifically designed for Muslim communities. Ms Metwally knows some will be using this food to celebrate their own iftars  the evening meal in which Muslims end their daily Ramadan fast. "I'm experiencing Ramadan for the first time in isolation and it's been so strange because usually it's such a social time where you break your fast with others.  "But I've come to terms with a changed Ramadan. While we've lost the usual elements like the mosques and socialisation  we haven't lost that sense of community.  Ms Metwally is a volunteer at Addison Road Community Centre Organisation (ARCCO) in Marrickville which seven weeks ago turned into a major food deployment operation to reach vulnerable community members during the COVID-19 crisis.  The community hall which used to hold social functions is now full of fresh fruit and vegetables, refrigerators of eggs and milk and hundreds of cans.  It works like clockwork with volunteers physically distanced at each station as food is packed, labelled, and delivered into vans. Chief Executive of ARCCO Rosanna Barbero is comfortable with managing big-picture logistics in crisis.  She's worked for the United Nations and Oxfam aid operations across the Middle East, Asia and Africa for the last three decades.  "In a couple of hours we repurposed the empty Addison Road community hall into the headquarters  because we knew we'd have to deploy food immediately because people would be in need.  "Particularly those people who have fallen through the cracks or lost jobs." ARCCO has no government funding  and relies on donations and volunteers during this pandemic.  It is focused on servicing gaps in the stimulus packages  targeting refugee and asylum-seeker communities, international students, sex workers and even tourists.  It has been working in food security since 2015 but never quite at this scale.  "This definitely mirrors deployment operations I've worked on," Ms Barbero said. The boxes that Ms Metwally packed are in a van parked in Belmore.  Syeda Shah, a mother of five is one of the first to receive one.  Ms Shah and her family are asylum seekers from northern Pakistan  fleeing persecution for their religion in which the minority Shia-Muslim group are targeted. For the family who live in Georges Hall, food security has always been an issue in their seven years in Australia on bridging visas with minimal government support.  However, the worry to feed her kids this Ramadan increased as prices went up or stock sold quickly in their local grocery stores due to the crisis.  "It's always a big month for Muslims but we can't afford most things," Ms Shah said. "But right now, it's even harder as most prices are up for spices, for rice."  Addison Road was a lifeline. Particularly as extra costs pile up like pre-paid data packs for her husband and their children to rely on to complete studies from home.  They cannot afford a monthly internet plan.  "It's really helped. We've got plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables, and tinned food," Ms Shah said. "Without this we don't have access to fruits and veggies. This the fruit we put in my kids' lunchboxes the days they go to school." But what Ms Shah loves most is the fact she's always made to feel resilient. "They respect everyone. When they give food they give it with love.  "They never use words like poor or that they're helping 'people like us' which charities often use." While she misses the social gatherings  the work the organisation is doing has embodied the values of Ramadan she holds close.  "Fasting in the time of Ramadan is important as you can understand hunger and the stress of other people who may not have enough food.  "What they're doing here is so important."  
Victorians are being told that from next month, the message is shifting from "stay home" to "stay safe", as a raft of coronavirus restrictions ease. But the relaxed restrictions will not change the health advice to maintain a 1.5 metre distance from others, avoid hugging and kissing where possible, and give space to those around you. And those who are vulnerable, such as Victorians over 70, or those with chronic health conditions, are still being urged to think carefully about limiting their interactions in order to reduce the risk of infection. Premier Daniel Andrews has also made clear the changes will only proceed if every Victorian with the slightest of symptoms continues to be tested to maintain what he says are "among the highest test rates in the world". With that in mind, this is what the path out of restrictions for Australia's second most-populous state will look like. While lots of things are loosening up, the direction for every Victorian who is able to work from home to do so remains, at least for the rest of June. "If we have literally hundreds and hundreds of thousands of people returning to office blocks, pressing lift buttons, sharing the kitchen, using common spaces, bathrooms and other spaces like that, then we will simply have this virus get away from us," Mr Andrews said. "It is the greatest risk to a second wave and then all that we're trying to avoid  the notion of having to reimpose some of these rules." While the Premier acknowledged continuing to work from home would be frustrating and difficult for some businesses, Chief Health Officer Brett Sutton said others had discovered its silver lining. He encouraged businesses to think about what they could do with their IT infrastructure or organisation to make working from home sustainable. From June 1, Victorians will be able to have 20 people under the roofs of their homes  but that includes those who live there. So, for example, a family of three will be able to host 17 people in their house. And gatherings outside, such as picnics, will be able to include up to 20 people as well. The Premier has urged people remain mindful of the pandemic and the need for physical distancing. "In all your activities, be considered, be cautious, use your common sense," Mr Andrews said. The limit on the number of people allowed at house inspections and auctions will also rise from 10 to 20, with real estate agents required to keep track of the number of attendees and their contact details. With the bushfires and the pandemic having hammered Victoria's tourism economy, the latest easing of restrictions holds good news, with overnight stays at accommodation and private residences allowed from June 1. That extends to campgrounds and caravan parks, where people will be able to pitch a tent and camp overnight once again. But don't expect communal facilities like kitchens or bathrooms to be available. They'll remain closed to reduce the transmission risk presented by shared spaces. A range of cultural spaces will be allowed to reopen across the month, starting with galleries, museums, drive-in cinemas and historic sites from June 1. Zoos, outdoor amusement parks, libraries, youth centres and community facilities will also be given the green light from the start of the month. Beauty and personal care services like nail salons, spas and tattoo parlours will also reopen, but they will be required to keep the contact details of each customer. All of these places will need to follow physical-distancing directions and a limit of 20 patrons "per space" will apply. Professor Sutton defined a "space" like this: "It's largely about a single, undivided space where you can manage the flow of people going in and out." But the overriding rule of 4 square metres of space per customer still applies, so it's possible some smaller venues won't be able to host the full 20 people. If you're keen to visit Melbourne Zoo, Healesville Sanctuary or Werribee Open Range Zoo, you'll need to plan ahead. They announced they'll be restricting entry tickets to online purchases so they can cap attendance at their zoos to 2,000, 1,500 and 1,000 respectively. So if you turn up without buying ahead, you could be turned away at the gate if they're already at capacity. And the enclosed indoor areas such as the reptile and nocturnal houses will remain closed. If all goes according to plan, on June 22 that limit will be raised to 50 people, with cinemas and theatres finally able to open their doors again. The Premier has stressed coronavirus testing results will inform the easing of restrictions at every step of the way, with a focus on avoiding a scenario where a liberty is offered to businesses that then has to be taken back. "The more people that get tested, the more options we have, to not make changes based on guesswork, but instead to make changes based on what the data is telling us," he said. It's getting easier for Victorians to get out and about for different kinds of exercise, starting with the reopening of public playgrounds and outdoor gym equipment from Tuesday, the same day state schools will welcome back the first wave of students to classrooms. Community sport will be able to run from June 1 provided it's held outdoors or with no more than 20 people in undivided spaces, is non-contact and people are able to play while respecting 1.5 metre physical distancing. Swimming pools will also be able to open, but with that limit of 20 people in place. If community transmission rates remain low and testing rates high, indoor gyms and fitness centres will be able to open their doors again on June 22, with no more than 20 people per space and up to 10 people involved in a group or activity at any one time. June 22 is also the date Victorians (and anyone from interstate for that matter) should be able to take to the state's ski slopes, which are set for a bumper season of snow this year. The limiton funeral attendees has been tough, which may be why it's being relaxed fastest, with up to 50 mourners allowed at funerals from June 1. For weddings, up to 20 people will be allowed, plus the celebrant and couple. The same limit of 20 people will apply to "private worship or small religious ceremonies", in addition to those required to perform the service. While the Government has already announced that restaurants, cafes and the dining section of pubs will be able to reopen from June 1 with a 20-person limit (rising to 50 on June 22), bars and clubs are proving more of a challenge. A city's signature nightlife culture is on life support, with some landmark Melbourne venues already pulling the plug and many more expected to go the same way. "I think indoor gatherings of that nature, where it's not table service, it's  very challenging to maintain social distance and where you've got alcohol being consumed  let's be clear  at a higher level than it might be in other settings  I think that those types of venues are going to be the very last venues to reopen," Mr Andrews said. "They would have to look very, very different and then it'll be a matter of us engaging with that sector to have a conversation with them about whether they want to open up with those rules." If you're after more information, the Department of Health and Human Services has set up a page that breaks this all down in much more detail. 
David Allen has been in choirs since he was three years old. Now, the coronavirus survivor struggles to sing at all and runs out of air mid-line. The 32-year-old audiologist from Epping, in Sydney's north-west, was infected with COVID-19 while travelling in Belgium in early March. Doctors say his voice will return but two months after being cleared of the virus, David says he still struggles daily with fatigue and shortness of breath. "There is this moment where every time I push myself beyond what I can to that slightly breathless point, there is this just grinding fear that maybe the next breath won't actually come," he says. Doctors have told him it is normal for a recovery from pneumonia to be about four to six months as the damaged lung linings fix themselves, and encouraged him to keep up singing and walking to build strength. Earlier this month, he wrote about his recovery on social media and says he was inundated with people sharing similar stories of struggling and feeling like they had no-one to talk to.  "It really connected with a lot of people," he says. "The most heartbreaking part of it was the number of people who said 'I know, this is me, this is my experience'. "The discourse is very much about once you are  quote-unquote  'recovered', that somehow your life goes back to normal, and it really doesn't," David says. "We haven't spoken about that story because it's scary, you know? It's really, really scary being a 32-year-old who is unable to walk around the park." David contracted coronavirus at a dance party and admits he was "quite naive" at the time about the risk of infection.  When he got back to Sydney, he had a few days off for jet lag when news emerged of infections from the party and he tested positive on March 16 despite not having any symptoms at that stage.  Two days later, he started having trouble breathing, severe headaches, chills and fatigue. It was like, he says, having flu multiple times over. NSW went into lockdown two days before David was cleared by NSW Health on March 25. By March 27, NSW saw its largest daily case spike to date with 212 confirmed COVID-19 infections. While David was never admitted to hospital for COVID-19, one day, feeling overwhelmed by the isolation and a shortness of breath, he had an anxiety attack, was briefly hospitalised for monitoring and is now on a mental-health plan.  David knows he is fortunate to have emerged at all from the suffocating fog of COVID-19 but says it is not really cause for celebration.  "It's hard to feel lucky when we're talking about the statistics," he says. "I don't feel particularly lucky. I feel grief for so many people who have become sick and those who have died or have ongoing disability." He says what is important to think about is that this is a collective story of trauma and grief for the loss of normal life. "Everybody is traumatised, everybody is hurting," he says. "The big thing that really stands out to me is there's a lot of discussion about getting back to normal. "We need an acknowledgement, a change in our language that it's not about going back to what it was before. It's not about reopening the country, it's about opening it in a new way.  "We are never going back to normal." Professor Tania Sorrell is director of the Marie Bashir Institute for Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity at the University of Sydney and says patients will need to be followed for a long time to fully understand COVID-19 recovery.  "We are really trying very hard to determine exactly when the long-term consequences are and we will need to follow patients for up to two years to be confident that we can be really clear about it," she says.  "I'm certainly aware of individual patients who seem to feel well one day and feel terrible the next, or they look as though they're improving and suddenly there seems to be a relapse," she says. In addition to impacts on the body, it's important to bear in mind mental health, too, she says.  "It's a little bit like post-traumatic stress disorder that patients or individuals can suffer if they've been to war or in any other really stressful condition.  "Under those circumstances, hospitals typically do have support processes for their patients after discharge, which include psychological assessment, social worker assessment as well as follow-up by various clinicians." She said long-term follow-up clinics are being set up and GPs are also undertaking follow-ups. There's also access to support processes such as psychological or social-worker assessment. She says, in general, rest is the best therapy and people like David Allen are doing the right thing by exercising without overdoing it. She says while some analogies can be drawn with other diseases, COVID-19 remains uncharted territory. "We are learning about this  it's a new disease, and that's why as a health care profession we want to keep a very close eye on our patients to make sure that we're not missing something and that we can offer the best support and care that we can." 
Peter Jones looks at the whiteboard in his North Melbourne office that  ironically, now  he put up just a couple of months ago to visualise his frantic year ahead. "Olympic dinner, gone. Committee for Melbourne event, gone. Starry Night  gone," he says as he places a cross against his list of cancellations. A stalwart of the major events industry, Mr Jones says the pandemic has been "the worst thing you could ever imagine in your wildest dreams for the events industry as a whole". Until now, the authorities' focus has been on reuniting households and allowing small gatherings. But Australia's iconic major events and functions are, at this stage, on hold indefinitely, with no federal guidelines as to how they will be able to return. Industry insiders fear it will be early next year before the multi-billion-dollar industry can start to revive. It's estimated cancellations of both major events and business events will account for a $35 billion loss to the economy in 12 months and more than 92,000 jobs. Mr Jones considers the fate of the AFL parade he's organised for 24 years. "You're talking about an event that takes about eight months to plan, has about two and a half thousand people that are involved in putting it together, the hiring, all of the infrastructure that goes into it, it's broadcast on TV  you can't say, well, we're going to do half of that," he says. Mr Jones says when he recently asked the City of Melbourne for a permit for the parade, "I think they laughed at me". "I was only half joking, knowing what the response would be. They're not in a position to [give a permit]." He says it could be months before those sort of events can happen. "New Year's Eve for councils would have to be a big issue," he says. "We're talking into January, February and March next year of events that may not happen in the same way." He fears many smaller operators in the industry will not be able to ride out the crisis. "We will never ever go back to what we were. And as an industry, we need to adapt." Andrew Westacott was in the unenviable position of presiding over the first major event in Australia to be sucked into the pandemic's vortex: the complex multinational behemoth that is the Formula 1 Grand Prix. Over a number of days before the March event, it was mired in confusion and controversy as drivers wondered aloud why the race was going ahead. Some pulled the pin and flew out, hours before angry fans were eventually told of the cancellation as they gathered outside Albert Park gates on Friday, March 13 (Mr Westacott remembers the date with a slight raise of his eyebrows), just two days ahead of the race. "We were unaware that several of the drivers had caught early morning flights out of Australia," Mr Westacott says in his first on-camera interview since that time. "The decision actually hadn't been officially made by the FAA in Formula One and ourselves until early that morning. "So that took us by surprise, but that was that changing nature of what was happening on many, many different fronts." Mr Westacott had been juggling his international bosses, commercial rightsholders, state and federal health authorities and Australian Border Force. "There were a lot of inputs," he says. Still, weeks later, he says the decision-making was sound. "I actually don't think anything went wrong   [but] I still send our apologies to the fans who had travelled so, so many distances," he says. "I think we made the right decision at the right time." He's upbeat that next year's event will go ahead in some form. "With an open-air park on a very, very large footprint, we actually probably have a lot of benefits over some enclosed spaces," he says. "But there are also some challenges when it comes to temporary infrastructure." Mr Westacott says they extended the bump-out of the event for the contractors who were doing it tough, and are still working their way through refunds and credits for disappointed fans. When asked if he would, like his counterparts at the Australian Open, consider a scenario inviting New Zealand fans over if the "travel bubble" with Australia proceeds, he laughs: "I don't disagree with that sort of principle. One of the things I've always said is that we steal shamelessly." Tennis Australia CEO Craig Tiley watched the unfolding mess at the Grand Prix, knowing he had avoided the viral bullet by mere weeks. "I spoke to Andrew [Westacott] following it. And we felt for Formula One and the organisation, because no one knew," he says. "They were just trying to do what they felt was the best thing at that point in time, not knowing how quickly this thing was moving. "It was heavily criticised for it, but  it totally turned out to be the right decision." Mr Tiley says there are lessons from the Grand Prix's perfect storm of misfortune. "One of the learnings that we have taken from that, and we did this with our organisation, is we've tried to make a decision as early as possible," he says. "And not really knowing if it's the right decision, but making sure that is the best decision for that moment in time." Mr Tiley believes his team was in a better position to handle uncontrollable situations than it might have been, having had its own brush with a natural disaster  choking smoke from bushfires at January's event. Still, he says: "We have no baseline, and no sport and no government has a baseline, on how to manage [these crises]." Tennis Australia is lucky too, to have made the relatively uncommon investment in pandemic insurance, although that runs out in July. The Grand Prix showed the high stakes of a mishandled cancellation and the risks to public confidence and health if a restart is bungled are immense. Mr Tiley says the key will be establishing trust through honest communication with the public. "It has to be authentic, has to be transparent," he says. "I think that's really important, not just for sport, but for everyone to do, because from a leadership point of view, the moment you don't become believable, then you can't get anything done." While Mr Tiley says professional sports are sharing their strategies about how to navigate the murky months ahead, event planner Peter Jones says the wider industry needs to do more. "The industry has actually got to get together for the first time like it probably hasn't [before], and be able to go out with a set of guidelines saying this is the way we will operate," he says. "And that's then going to be communicated to the general public." Anne Jamieson, vice-president of the Victorian Tourism Industry Council, says governments also need to come to the party more when it comes to business events. They are the large conferences, gala dinners, charity events, that are a similarly huge economic driver as major events  bringing in $3.4 billion in Victoria alone, versus $2.5 billion by major events  but without the public profile. "We'd probably like to see a little bit more support come from government," Ms Jamieson says. "I think that we need to be careful that [the sector] doesn't get left behind." And coming back, she says, won't be straightforward. "Somebody's going to have to take the step to actually run an event and test everything that needs to be done from a health and safety perspective, from how they're going to manage delegates, how they're going to manage registrations, et cetera," she says. "They're probably going to have to have an action plan in place for every single event from a health and safety perspective, and actually have a ground crew running every day to make sure that they're mitigating and managing people that are potentially not complying to what they actually need to comply to." Ms Jamieson and Mr Jones fear for the future of networking events, where no streaming platform can replace the buzz and connection that comes with pre-COVID-19 mingling. Mr Jones says to get ready for public events to change forever. "I can still see in years to come, people being checked for health. "People can check for names, where they've been, maybe there is going to be an app that says, 'I've been to the football, I've been here'  that will happen, because we will never ever go back to what we were." 
UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson's senior adviser Dominic Cummings is fighting for his job after flouting the Government's coronavirus lockdown rules. Mr Johnson is standing by Mr Cummings despite calls from within his own Conservative Party for the aide to be dismissed for driving 250 miles (400 kilometres) during the coronavirus lockdown. Mr Cummings, one of the key figures in the 2016 Brexit campaign, came under pressure when newspapers reported he had travelled from London to northern England at the end of March, when his wife was ill with COVID-19 symptoms during a nationwide lockdown. Mr Johnson's office said in a statement that Mr Cummings made the trip because his wife was showing coronavirus symptoms, he thought he was likely to also get sick, and his parents had offered to help look after the couple's young son. The statement said Mr Cummings stayed in a house "near to but separate from" his extended family in Durham. The UK's lockdown stipulated that people should remain at home, leaving only for essential local errands and exercise. In a message to the nation on March 23, Mr Johnson said: "From this evening I must give the British people a very simple instruction  you must stay at home". Mr Cummings was seen in London on March 27 but travelled to Durham at some time between then and March 31, according to the BBC. Mr Cummings, who has repeatedly refused to resign, entered 10 Downing Street on Sunday (local time) after some Tory MPs demanded he quit. "It is intolerable that Boris's Government is losing so much political capital," MP Steve Baker wrote on Twitter. "Dominic Cummings must go." Fellow Conservative MPDamian Collinssaid Mr Cummings "has a track record of believing that the rules don't apply to him and treating the scrutiny that should come to anyone in a position of authority with contempt". "The Government would be better without him," he said. Mr Johnson, however, was steadfast in his support of Mr Cummings. "I conclude that in travelling to find the right kind of childcare, at the moment when both he and his wife were about to be incapacitated by coronavirus, and when he had no alternative  I think he followed the instincts of every father, and every parent. And I do not mark him down for that.," Mr Johnson said. "I believe that in every respect he has acted responsibly and legally." Keir Starmer, leader of the Opposition Labour Party, described Mr Johnson's decision to take no action against Mr Cummings as "an insult to the sacrifices made by the British people". "This was a test of the Prime Minister and he has failed it," Mr Starmer said in a statement. The UK Civil Service official Twitter feed posted and then deleted a message which appeared to be a criticism of Mr Johnson's stance. "Arrogant and offensive. Can you imagine working with these truth twisters?" Other prominent British figures have resigned after breaking lockdown rules. Epidemiologist Neil Ferguson quit as a member of the Government's scientific advisory group after he was visited at home by his girlfriend. Scotland's chief medical officer, Catherine Calderwood, stepped down after she was caught making two trips to her second home. On Saturday (local time), when asked if he would resign, Mr Cummings said he acted responsibly and legally and scolded reporters outside his house for getting the 2016 Brexit referendum wrong. "Obviously not," he said of resignation. "You guys are probably all about as right about that as you were about Brexit: do you remember how right you all were about that?" Mr Cummings said. With a total of 260,916 confirmed cases and 36,875 dead, the United Kingdom has the worst official COVID-19 death toll in Europe ABC/Reuters 
Kim Bieber broke social and physical distancing rules a few weeks ago and has no regrets. Some might argue she had no choice. "I needed to feel their presence," she says. "My children, my grandchildren. To hold them and tell them I love them." Ms Bieber has terminal cancer and is receiving palliative care. She has been told she has about a week or ten days to live. "It could've been the last time. Every time could be the last time," she says. For several months, the 61-year-old had been enforcing strict social distancing rules. Few people were allowed inside her Fitzroy home in Melbourne's inner north-east, which is decorated with colourful artwork painted by her three grandchildren. The furniture was also moved to ensure that when a nurse or doctor visited, people were kept metres apart. She had been undergoing cancer treatment since Christmas and catching COVID-19, or even the common cold, could have been a death sentence. "We were keeping stricter rules than what you'd see at the supermarket or Queen Victoria Market," she says. "Plus, I didn't want to upset Dan Andrews," she jokes. Even though she needs help from her husband Rafael to walk a few steps, and her speech can be slow, her mind is still quick. But she doesn't joke about how painful isolation from her family has been, as the cancer spread to her brain and the days became shorter and colder. "April was very grey. I hadn't seen my family for months  It was quite a lonely time," she says. "We did Facetime or things like that. It wasn't the same." Thousands of people receiving palliative care in Australia are getting less contact with others, including their nurses, because of the coronavirus restrictions. Anne Myers has been a palliative care nurse with Melbourne City Mission for 14 years. "This is a very difficult situation for people," she says.  "It is bringing in extra ethical and moral decisions for people. What's the best thing to do for a loved one?  "Especially in a PCU [Palliative Care Unit] where only one [a family member] may be allowed to go in." Ms Myers says face-to-face home visits are now only for terminal patients in home care and only then if the family has been screened for coronavirus and if physical-distancing measures are in place. But she says when it comes to treating the dying, and consoling a family, doing it at a distance is difficult. "Eighty per cent of our clients now are probably getting phone calls, whereas before 80 per cent [were] getting visits," she says. "Our role is our relationships with our clients. All that non-verbal stuff  we miss all that and you realise, when you don't have that face-to-face, how needed that is." Ms Bieber makes light of how hard social distancing has been in the grand scheme of things. She says being an "educated white woman" in inner-city Melbourne has given her certain privileges, including receiving palliative care at home. "I have worked with Holocaust survivors," the former psychotherapist says. "I have worked with asylum seekers, refugees. COVID-19 is pretty easy really." She even says having terminal cancer has some positives. Knowing she is dying has allowed her to be more aggressive with financial institutions that she had previously struggled with. "One day someone said to me, 'Just get your husband to do that,' and I had to say, 'Look, I'm dying of brain cancer and he's got dementia. You just need to sort it," she says. "I guess sometimes we need to be more assertive than we would otherwise want," she says, laughing. With that newfound assertiveness, Ms Bieber organised a visit from her children and grandchildren. The Fitzroy Police Station was called and told people were coming inside her home and why. "I didn't want my family to get fined for something they couldn't afford," she says. "They [the police] didn't quite say, 'Do whatever you like, love'  but that was the sentiment." On a cold day in April, she saw her family again and has been able to see them a few times since. "I just hold them. I just told them I love them," she says. "And I hold my daughter, and we tell stories about our life together and it is a celebration really. "It was like a filling up the soul again." While Kim Bieber can't move much, she says her children do it for her when they visit. "One of my grandchildren does flips and shows me," she says. "One of my grandchildren has just become a Cub, and I talk to her all about those things." "The other is very interested in football. God knows why, really. "They know I'm going to die, and they send me little messages in the morning, like: 'Guess what Grandma? I love you'. "It's sad. There is sadness, but there is a joy. A joy in being able to say goodbye.  "I have been very fortunate." Ms Bieber says there is a lesson for everyone now they have experienced their own lockdown and what it feels like. "We should be more sensitive to what goes on for people who are isolated or unwell, or elderly, or disabled in a way," she says. "That we can be kinder and more compassionate." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. 
Chief Nursing and Midwifery Officer Alison McMillan says more than 6 million Australians have downloaded the Government's coronavirus contact tracing app. Meanwhile, Victoria and New South Wales are both easing restrictions further, with changes to come into place from next week. Look back on Sunday's events as they unfolded. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery Thanks for following along for another day of COVID-19-related news, everyone. The live blog will of course be back in the morning. And in the meantime, we'll keep adding the latest to our coronavirus update story overnight, so that's the article to read for the biggest developments as they happen. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery Chief Minister Michael Gunner said the Biosecurity Act  limiting travel to remote communities  would be removed almost two weeks ahead of schedule after consultation with land councils and traditional owners. For the full story, head here. By Yasmin Jeffery Clive Palmer will lodge documents with the High Court this week, arguing Western Australia's border closure is unconstitutional, as the state again recorded no new cases of COVID-19, AAP reports. Mr Palmer wanted to visit WA for meetings with businesspeople, Senator Mathias Cormann and potential 2021 state election candidates for his United Australia Party, but was rejected due to coronavirus restrictions. "Closing down the border is not only an act of stupidity by WA Premier Mark McGowan, but it is against the Australian constitution and I am confident the High Court will see it that way as well," Mr Palmer said in a statement on Sunday. "The WA premier needs to act now to ensure a successful future beyond COVID-19 by opening his borders to allow trade and travel from Australian states into WA. "It is a matter of national importance that the borders be open." Mr Palmer said he would lodge the legal documents on Monday and hoped to have a directions hearing in the High Court by the end of the week. Mr McGowan said on Friday that he endorsed the WA police commissioner's decision not to grant Mr Palmer an exemption from the travel ban. The premier has continued to insist WA's interstate borders will remain closed for months, despite criticism from some, including NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian. Audience comment by Agreed I agree with So Sad - where's the petition for journos to at least ask the CMOs how their day is going?  
The people of Paradise City, Sao Paulo's second biggest favela, are used to being ignored by government. The shanty-town ("Paraisopolis" in the local tongue) sprang up in the shadows of the luxury apartment complexes of nearby Morumbi, one of the city's most affluent suburbs. But its 100,000 residents have never had access to proper healthcare, education or sanitation. So, when the coronavirus started creeping through the tightly packed alleys, Gilson Rodrigues knew he had to take matters into his own hands. "It is a question of saving lives," he told ABC. Through crowdfunding and a few generous private donations, the community leader hired three private ambulances and eight medical professionals to cope with the looming emergency. "Things are getting serious," he said. "Many people don't exactly understand what is happening.  "People continue walking in the streets as if the virus hasn't arrived in our community, as if the virus was only affecting rich people who travelled outside the country." With thousands of residents now reportedly showing symptoms, there's little doubt the virus is here. The thousands of freshly dug graves in Sao Paolo's cemeteries paint a jarring picture of what comes next. Back in February, this was Julio Croda's worst-case scenario. As the Health Ministry's chief infectious disease advisor, it was his job to coordinate Brazil's coronavirus response. He developed a detailed policy on social distancing which was fiercely rejected by the President, Jair Bolsonaro. Then he was forced to resign. "During this time, you had a fight between [Health] Minister Mandetta and President Bolsonaro about this recommendation  For this reason, I decided to leave the Government," Dr Croda told ABC. "[It was] very hard because I want to help. I want to support public health." Three weeks later, his former boss, health minister Luiz Henrique Mandetta, was fired. The minister who replaced him, Nelson Teich, resigned a month after that. "The COVID-19 pandemic has become a political issue. This is the problem," said Dr Croda. Populist President Jair Bolsonaro has earned the nickname "Trump of the Tropics" for his populist zeal and anti-science approach to government. Indeed, his approach to the pandemic has often echoed that of the US President. He downplayed COVID-19 for months, calling it "a little flu" that Brazilians were uniquely suited to overcome. He's touted the unproven and potentially dangerous anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine as effective protection against the virus, noting the US President was taking it preventatively. He demanded all but the elderly ignore the state governments' social isolation restrictions, even attending anti-lockdown protests in person to insist nothing was more important than the economy. When the President sacked his health minister in April, he said: "Mandetta's vision was that of health, of life. Mine is more than life, it includes the economy, jobs." One highly respected British medical journal, The Lancet, called Bolsonaro the "biggest threat" to public health in Brazil. In April, when the coronavirus death toll surpassed 5,000, the President told the press: "So what? I mourn, but what do you want me to do about it?" Now, more than 1,000 people are dying every day. Brazil is now the sixth country to register more than 20,000 deaths. And experts say the peak of the outbreak is still weeks away. Brazil's health system is not perfect. But it's not terrible either, especially when compared to other South American nations. Dr Croda, who now works at the Federal University of Mato Grosso do Sul, points to Brazil's successful containment of the Zika virus and HIV as evidence the country has the capacity to tackle public health crises. But in the case of coronavirus, he's witnessed first-hand a "perfect storm for bad outcomes". Social distancing wasn't adopted early enough, he says, and it's difficult to carry out effectively in the crowded favelas anyway. He points to the lack of testing capacity, even now, and the 80 cities that don't have any intensive care unit beds. "When you don't have ICU beds, the lethality associated with the disease increases too," he told ABC. That's already playing out. "The people [are dying] in front of the hospital without any support  They're dying on the street." Communities in the Amazon rainforest are particularly vulnerable. Dozens of Indigenous groups have been hit already. Health experts say the disease is spreading rapidly amongst the Indigenous populations there, including across the border to Peru and Colombia. Many hospitals are severely understaffed, under-resourced and far away from many isolated rainforest communities. Critical COVID-19 patients are being evacuated by plane to the only intensive care units in the vast region, but services are severely stretched. The Mayor of Manaus called what was happening to his people a "crime against humanity". "I fear genocide and I want to denounce this thing to the whole world. We have here a government that does not care about the lives of the Indians." Back in Paradise City, Gilson Rodrigues is coordinating a group of volunteers he calls "street presidents". Two "presidents" are assigned for every 50 coronavirus cases, taking care of sick families and encouraging them to stay home. Gilson has also organised food parcels for those in need and established two isolation shelters. He continues to spread the message about social distancing. "We need to show people why they need to stay home because if they end up in hospital, the respiratory machines won't be there to help them. And they will die." 
Ian Dunlop worries about his grandchildren. He worries time is running out. "We run the risk within the next probably five to 10 years, that we may trigger irreversible tipping points in the climate system," he says. He used to be a fossil fuel industry executive. Now he advocates for action on climate change. Global warming of 1.5 degrees Celsius in the next 20 years or so is essentially baked in, according to the UN's climate body  and Ian fears it won't stop there. "Three degrees Celsius, the best national security experts in the world consider will be social chaos," he says. "You can already see that and what happened with our bushfires. You look at major events like that and the social fabric really starts to break down very quickly." But he's not without hope. We're currently living through a life-changing, economy-twisting event: a global pandemic. Ian sees our response to coronavirus as a dress rehearsal for a much bigger challenge. "The only way we can really address climate change now is by some form of emergency action," he says. "We've left it too late to move through what people have been calling a graduating transition." When we're on the other side of this emergency, will we have the ability and will to refocus on climate change? Can we rebuild a fragile economy while taking action? Or will coronavirus push the issue of climate change to the backburner? Kim Sinclair also worries about her children, but it's not climate change that's front of mind. "I worry more about how they're going to put food on the table. Will they have a roof over their heads? What opportunities do they have in front of them?" She lives in Moranbah in central Queensland  where the mines are everything. Most of the mines produce coking coal for export steel markets. Kim worked at one of them for eight years, her husband still does. For Kim and the people she knows, there's a lot of fear around climate change and just what "urgent action" would entail. "There's nothing for us to put any of our hopes on. And unfortunately, very rarely are we consulted in the process," she says. "It feels like our livelihoods, our control, our self-esteem, our everyday lives, that's being taken away from us. "There's no plan, there's no structure, there's no discussion. People are just left hopeless and scared and wondering what the future holds." More than a thousand kilometres south on the banks of the Hunter River sits another mining town, Singleton. Mayor Sue Moore's job includes planning for a future her town doesn't want to talk about. "Climate change is not being discussed here. Coal is very much still part of this area," she says. The science on climate change has long been settled, and it's unequivocal: the climate is changing and human emissions of greenhouse gases are to blame. But that hasn't convinced Sue, who doesn't believe humans are causing the climate to change any faster. "I haven't seen anything that demonstrates to me that it is. That's my personal feeling." Coal mining directly accounts for 23 per cent of Singleton's workforce. The area is the biggest source of coal royalties for the NSW Government's coffers. Sue doesn't think mining will end any time soon  some mines in the area have the approvals for another 20 years at least. But in local government in the Hunter, "diversification" and "transformation" are important topics. Along with other councils in the region, Singleton is looking at opportunities like wind and solar. "There's so much potential there and we need to be ready for those opportunities as they present," Sue says. "The [community] doesn't want to talk about leaving coal  and we're not anti-coal by any means. But we want to be prepared for when coal may not be here any longer, which might be 50 years out." The UN's climate body says in order to stop global warming at 1.5C, the world must reach net zero emissions by 2050  meaning any new emissions into the atmosphere are removed or offset. More than 70 countries around the world, every Australian state and territory, the Federal Opposition, and industry groups like the Business Council of Australia all support the target. ClimateWorks Australia, which was co-founded by Monash University, has researched how Australia could get there. Its plan would require: CEO Anna Skarbek says the next decade is make or break. "It's the decade that emissions not only need to turn around but need to halve worldwide, so that we can then halve emissions again the following decade and reach net zero the decade thereafter," she says. "If we don't do that, we will have emitted, cumulatively, too many emissions along the way. So that even if you did reach net zero emissions at some point in the future, we've already put too much into the atmosphere to make warming tip over those limits." Anna says so much of the technology needed to achieve the cut in emissions already exists. "We can in fact leapfrog to a zero emissions alternative for most technologies in most sectors," she says. She says one massive project shows how Australia could become a clean energy superpower. We've known about climate change for decades, but we've done relatively little in response. In this special four-part series, Richard Aedy finds out why. With a proposed size of 6,500 square kilometres, the Asian Renewable Energy Hub in WA's Pilbara region would be more than half the size of Greater Sydney. CWP Renewables' Alex Hewitt says through wind and solar it will generate 15 gigawatts of power, with the capacity to expand to 26 gigawatts. That, he says, would make it the largest power project in the world. "We're going to use the electricity to make hydrogen, which then is an energy source which can go into all sorts of end uses  from cars and trucks and hydrogen fuel cells to industry, agriculture, heating, shipping fuels." Alex says moving away from fossil fuels for power is just one step. "The other sectors  agriculture, industry, transport, buildings  are much harder to decarbonise, and that's where hydrogen comes into play," he says. "When you start crunching some of the numbers on how much green hydrogen  as a fuel would be needed to decarbonise these sectors, the world will need not one of these big projects, but hundreds." The consortium behind the estimated $40 billion project is about to break ground, after being given the green light by Western Australia's environmental watchdog. Alex is confident the hub will be exporting and supplying the Australian market by 2027. The Grattan Institute believes hydrogen is key to creating a new multi-billion dollar industry  manufacturing and exporting low emission or so-called "green" steel. In a new report it says the industry could create tens of thousands of jobs in areas currently reliant on coal like Central Queensland and the Hunter Valley, but argues a flagship project should be invested in now. Emma Heard heads the Investor Group on Climate Change  its institutional investor members collectively manage $2 trillion in funds. Like Alex, she says what's crucial isn't just investing in new opportunities, but getting companies that are already operating to "decarbonise". "We can't just switch off the economy we've got, we have to actually get the economy we've got to reduce emissions," she says. "So in between investing in whole new climate solutions and technologies or not investing in carbon intensive or high-risk technologies and industries, there's the bulk of the economy, which is everything we do every day." She says the finance industry  including banks, insurers and super funds  is a critical part of that. "I'm optimistic about what I'm seeing is actually happening across the sector," she says. "Is it enough? No. Is it fast enough? No. Is it hugely important and really influential? Yes." An hour's drive from Sue's town of Singleton is a business that's ticking some of the boxes of ClimateWorks' plan for reaching net-zero. Molycop makes steel balls that are used in mining equipment to grind down rock by tumbling it in what the company's Brett Allen likens to a giant steel can. Rather than making the balls from scratch, they're made from melting down local scrap steel. "From an environmental perspective, it's about a quarter of the carbon footprint of a traditional steel making method," Brett says. It's still an energy intensive process. Brett says the company's recently improved its environmental credentials by negotiating to ensure part of the power they buy is from wind and solar. He says sourcing power from renewables and making recycled steel product gives Molycop a commercial advantage over overseas suppliers, because Australian mines are interested in reducing their overall carbon footprint. "Offsetting just a little more than half of our electricity lowers our carbon footprint even further to one eighth of that of a traditional steel-making process. So that, we feel, gives us a competitive advantage," he says. The challenge of reaching net zero emissions was already an enormous one before the global pandemic. Australia is now tentatively emerging from months of coronavirus lockdown. Nearly 600,000 people lost their job last month, the government's shovelling tens of billions of dollars into its JobKeeper program to keep more than 800,000 businesses afloat, borders remain closed and a road back to a sense of normality for many is still not clear. Many other countries are yet to reach this point, or are doing so with the burden of death tolls many times higher than ours. Second or third waves of outbreaks could be around the corner. Grattan Institute program director Danielle Wood is concerned the crisis will push action on climate change to the backburner. "We're going to come out the other side in a much weaker position from an economic perspective, certainly from a government budget perspective," she says. "A slow-burn issue like climate change, as big and as important as it is, might look less pressing in the scheme of things. "A real concern  is that this issue just gets pushed further and further into the future, and we know that we need to act soon rather than later." ClimateWorks CEO Anna Skarbeck says while an economic downturn does make the task harder, the response to the pandemic offers opportunities. "Governments, banks, companies will be looking for how to stimulate the economy on the other side of this pandemic," she says. She says there are "shovel ready projects" and new technology ready to be invested in which will help reduce carbon. She says the JobKeeper program also shows how the government can support vulnerable people in a global crisis. "I'm encouraged by what we're seeing around this community response to the pandemic, that we could take the principles of that to support workers who are affected by the climate change crisis." Business Council of Australia chief executive Jennifer Westacott says for many people the main worry right now is their job. "But this issue won't go away because of this terrible crisis we're in," she says. "It's important that as we think about the economic recovery, we think make sure that the transition we have to make in our energy mix, our energy consumption, our energy supply, our use of renewables, our investment in new technologies, is front and centre in that debate. "Because it's the opportunity that I'm worried about that we're going to miss, particularly in regional communities." Emma Heard says while the challenges of climate change and coronavirus are very different, the common element is resilience. "Our communities [are] integrating and thinking about these issues into the decisions that we make every day, and actually looking ahead and planning for what we know is coming and looking at how we can best respond to it," she says. "Time frames are different but the size of the challenge and the kinds of responses that we need to be implementing are quite, unfortunately, quite similar." Ian Dunlop says any response can't just come from Australia. He sees two ways the impact of climate change will play out globally. "It will either result in countries moving into an extremely defensive position where they put up the barriers, you end up with 'Fortress Australia'," he says. "We all try and optimise our own personal possessions or national possessions which means we will probably not get on top of the problem. "We will spiral downwards into what will end up being global collapse. "The alternative is we recognise that this is a problem that the entire world has and we cooperate to unprecedented degrees to get on top of it. "If we do that I think we have a chance of handling it, provided we treat it as a genuine emergency." Get more stories that go beyond the news cycle with our weekly newsletter. 
Political leaders have found it hard to resist the temptation of characterising the COVID-19 pandemic in military terms. Donald Trump  eager to self-apply a Rooseveltian shimmer in advance of November's scheduled presidential election  designated himself "a wartime President". "We are at war," declared France's Emmanuel Macron. "In this fight, we can be in no doubt that each and every one of us is directly enlisted," announced the British Prime Minister and Churchill nut Boris Johnson, shortly before he joined  unforgettably  his own casualty list. And sure  the parallels are superficially there. An attack by a foreign and inscrutable enemy. An apprehension of shared peril that's prompted a partial abandonment of entrenched political positions. A sharp uptick in backyard gardening and the home preparation of stodgy or indigestible loaves. Check, check, check. Just like wars, the virus is more deadly to men in the short term. While men and women appear to be at equal risk of catching COVID-19, men are  according to gender and health tracking agency Global Health 50/50  consistently more likely to die. In Australia, men are 57 per cent of the dead. In Italy, they're 61 per cent. (Why this disparity? When it first emerged in China, the best guess was that it had to do with Chinese men being enormously more dedicated cigarette smokers. But with men still dying faster in countries with negligible difference in smoking rates, the range of proffered theories has retreated, via immunology and hormones, to a generalised "we just don't know".) Women  again, just like in the global conflicts of our shared generational memory  are doing the bulk of the clean-up at home. And while high hopes were entertained for the crisis to bring new hordes of home-based workers and thus a significant rearrangement of workloads within the home itself, early signs are that the gendered patterns remain all too familiar. Professor Lyn Craig, famous for her research into the gendered division of labour in the home, is currently conducting a study with University of Melbourne colleague Brendan Churchill of behaviour among families in COVID-19 lockdown. Provisional results from the 2000-odd responses received so far indicate that for households with children, social isolation and school closures have created an extra six hours every day spent on caring for or supervising them. Of those six hours, the survey's responses suggest that for heterosexual nuclear families, around four hours are being done by women, and two by their male partners. Housework, meanwhile, is up around an hour and 10 minutes every day for women, but less than half an hour for men. "Shoving everybody into the house makes more work, especially for women," says Professor Craig. There is a weary familiarity to the two-to-one division of these additional child care hours; two to one is roughly the division of domestic work that women have shouldered in Australia for generations. Professor Craig says from a researcher's point of view, the COVID-19 crisis was a chance to observe how men would behave once they were able to work flexibly or from home, free from the constraints that traditional workplaces may impose on men in caring roles. "So far, we're not seeing that if you take away the constraints on men from the workplace that it just suddenly becomes more equal," she says. "There's something going on, but it's not just the structure. They certainly are participating more, but it's not rewriting the gender relativities." Of course, as the Workplace Gender Equality Agency points out in its recent paper Gendered Impacts of Covid-19 the demands on single parents  most of whom are women  are even greater. "With schools closed and other childcare arrangements, such as assistance from family and friends, discouraged due to social distancing measures, single mothers will have less ability to work and are at greater risk of poverty." With so much changing so quickly, it's hard to track the serpentine implications of this vast escalation in domestic workload, and the asymmetric style in which it is divided. But the question of whether lockdown has been a blessed opportunity for quiet work and contemplation in the home office or a nerve-jangling exercise in multi-tasking at the kitchen table more or less necessitating a 5pm glass of wine does appear to be a gendered one. "The next person who tweets about how productive Isaac Newton was while working from home gets my three-year-old posted to them!" threatened Sam Giles, a Birmingham-based fish palaeontologist, in March, in a viral tweet accompanied by a photo of her home office, in which the toddler on offer romps adorably in what is left of a cardboard box. The deputy editor of the British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, meanwhile, Elizabeth Hannon, found herself swamped with spirited responses when she tweeted this observation: "Negligible submissions to the journal from women in the last month. Never seen anything like it." Columbia volcanologist Einat Lev responded: "I just received an email from a male colleague of my same rank and family status (young kids). Except he has a full time stay at home wife. His email read 'This is a strange time but at least now, away from teaching, I can focus on writing'. Sigh & Scream." This is the gradually emerging spinoff from the extra domestic load: what are women doing less of outside the home, in this time of doing more within it? "Writing papers" is one small part of the answer. "Running for public office" may be another. In October, Victoria will be the first state to attempt a round of local government elections in the COVID-19 recovery. There are 79 councils across Victoria and 648 elected councillors, of whom 240  38 per cent  are women. But Ruth McGowan, gender equality advocate in local government and author of the book Get Elected, reports that there has been a collapse in interest from female candidates. "We're heading for a precipice," she says. "A lot of women are looking at it and they're facing economic insecurity and more demands on their home lives. Not to mention worries about going out and campaigning where you can't go to public meetings, you can't stand outside supermarkets, you've got to be super savvy to run an online campaign. A lot of them are just going: Stuff it." Local government organisations have lobbied the State Government to defer the elections, but have been rebuffed. Thirteen councils presently have just one elected woman. "I reckon we are going to go back to having some with no women at all," is Ms McGowan's prediction. What else will women do less of during this period, as they bunker down to keep their families stable? No doubt, the picture will become clearer over time, like a Polaroid. But what is obvious right now is that COVID-19 is not like a war in one very important respect: it is destroying the employment of women. "World War II was a driver of female empowerment," says Bianca Hartge Hazelman, founder and editor of Financy, which tracks women's financial independence. "Women got a taste of money in their pocket and that really drove a great push towards financial independence and equality. "What we are having now is almost the reverse. I've been tracking the financial progress of women for many years, and this is the slowest start to a year since 2015." The social and economic commentator George Megalogenis has dubbed the COVID-19 contraction a "pink-collar recession", pointing out that unlike the 1990s recession in which men lost 85 per cent of the jobs, and the 1980s recession in which they lost 76 per cent of the jobs, more than half of the direct workforce victims so far in this event are female. COVID-19 and its attendant gang of unintended consequences have a number of bad news items for women. One: They are over-represented in the fields most affected by an economic shutdown. The hardest-hit sector, food and accommodation services, for instance, is a heavy employer of women and has shed a third of its workforce since March, according to the latest information available from the Australian Bureau of Statistics. The next worst hit is the arts, which has lost a quarter of its total jobs  again, more of them from women.  Two: Women are over-represented in casual employment, and thus more likely to both lose their jobs during the COVID-19 contraction and be ineligible for support under the Government's Job Keeper package. Bankwest Curtin Economic Centre researchers Rebecca Cassells and Alan Duncan crunched the numbers of casual workers employed for less than the 12 month benchmark required to receive JobKeeper. They report that in the food and accommodation sector, there are an estimated 92,600 men who are casuals of less than a year's tenure, but 117,600 women. And in the health care and social assistance sector, the disparity is astonishing; 89,100 women, compared to 17,700 men. Sometimes, the data on casual workers is hard to winnow out; in the university sector, for example, which has long been accused of casualising its workforce, job figures tend to be reported in terms of full-time equivalent positions, cloaking the actual number of precariously employed teachers and administrative staff. The National Tertiary Education Union has estimated that women are around 58 per cent of casual employees in Australian universities. This matches the general pattern of women occupying more junior and less well-paid jobs in the sector; while more women than men are employed at universities, for example, the number of men employed at senior lecturer level or above is 9002, compared with 4685 women (on 2018 figures). Universities are not eligible for the JobKeeper program, so significant ongoing job losses are expected in a sector suffering an extreme impact from the loss of international student fees. Opposition education spokeswomen Tanya Plibersek said 66 per cent of non-academic positions at Australian universities were held by women. "Universities are like small towns," she said. "There's hospitality, there's admin, there's the cafeteria and student services  when you look at, for example, 600 job losses at Central Queensland University in Rockhampton, they are not professors. There are a lot of middle-paid and low-paid workers there too." A third significant factor for women is that they are hugely dominant in the (often low-paid) fields which during this crisis have qualified as "essential services". More than 75 per cent of "health professionals"  which includes everyone from pharmacists to social workers to medical scientists, according to the Workplace Gender Equality Agency  are women. This group, like teachers, is more likely to be called upon to keep working through the crisis, often putting their own health at risk, while simultaneously obliged to shoulder the previously discussed increase in domestic work. How to summarise this fusillade of data erupting from this extraordinary period in our nation's history, and the world's? Perhaps like this: Women right now are more likely to lose work that is paid and also more likely to pick up work that is unpaid. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Perhaps unsurprisingly, in view of all this, women are feeling distinctly more anxious and stressed than men right now. The COVID-19 Monitor Australia, a research project conducted by Vox Pops Labs in partnership with the ABC, asked respondents in its more recent survey to describe their own state of mental health. More than a third of women  35 per cent  said they very frequently felt stressed in the past week. This was a significant escalation from reported stress levels before the outbreak, when only 17 per cent of women classified themselves as very frequently stressed. And stress levels among men were lower than women's in both cases  13 per cent pre-COVID, rising to 22 per cent now. According to the survey, women have also experienced a slump in optimism over the course of the pandemic. Pre-COVID, 65 per cent of women said they felt optimistic, but in the most recent survey that fell to 47 per cent. Men's rate of optimism fell too, but less markedly; from a pre-COVID level of 56 per cent down to 52 per cent. Anxious, overworked, insecure; it's not where Australian women hoped we'd be, going into this new decade. "I think it's not going to be a good year for progress," says Bianca Hartge Hazelman. "One thing we really need to do is understand the real extent to which women carry the burden of unpaid work and support the economy. If they weren't doing that, the country would be in a worse place than we are now. Maybe we need that national call out, that recognition, like we did in wartime; this time to support women, who are statistically taking the brunt of this." 
While floating in the middle of a croc-laden river might not be the scenario one associates with care-free serenity, it's bliss for tour guide Dennis Miller. Sitting on his boat in Kakadu's Yellow Water Billabong at sunrise, Dennis is at peace and wondering: could croc country be the safest place in the world right now? "Come to the Northern Territory, it's the safest place on earth, we've got everything for you, and we're just waiting," says Dennis, talking to the ABC from his boat. But while Kakadu National Park remains closed to the public until at least June 18 under coronavirus restrictions, and tourists remain locked out of the Northern Territory under strict border controls, Dennis says the lack of tourism means guides, and even the crocs, are getting lonely. "The crocodiles are smiling, the ducks are whistling, and they're waiting for the tourists to come," he says. "We'd love to have you here in this beautiful spot when it opens." At this time of year in Kakadu's serene wetlands, Dennis says up to seven cruises a day with groups from all over Australia and across the world would usually depart for the famous Yellow Water Cruise. "It's beautiful at all times of the day, but sunrise is special: with the sun coming up behind the escarpment, hitting the water and the colour," Dennis says. "The sunset, too, when you get the reflections on the trees there and the colour really comes out. "In the Northern Territory, the floodplain, the river system, all those ecosystems connected together [you see] on the cruise. It's the only place in the Territory that has all these environments; all the birds and the crocodiles all in one." But with no tourists to entertain, Dennis, one of the most popular guides on Kakadu's waterways, says he remains hard at work in the park. "There's lots to do getting the boats ready and the hotel ready for the tourists when they get here as well," he says. Stephen Mills, the tours manager at Kakadu Tourism, believes Kakadu will remain well-visited by tourists when border restrictions lift in the Territory. "When you have scenery like this, you can understand why the world wants to come to Kakadu," Stephen says. "[It's] one of the richest cultural areas in Australia. 65,000 years the Indigenous people have lived here continuously. "There are hundreds of crocs, millions of birds, wallabies, the fish life is incredible. It truly is one of the wonders of the world." Tess Atie, who runs cultural tours with NT Indigenous Tours at Litchfield National Park south of Darwin, says she is hard at work planning for tourists when the Territory's borders ultimately reopen. But for now, only Northern Territory residents can visit Litchfield  a place Tess grew up hunting for turtles and fishing for barramundi. "My family have lived here all our lives," she says. "We've been living and hunting through this area, coming here for generations. "I love sharing my Aboriginal cultural connection with our visitors when they come from interstate or around the world  I'm very lucky and fortunate to give them that cultural experience here in Litchfield." For tourism operators like Tess who rely on interstate and overseas travel, the current peak season between Easter and September in the NT will yield very little business. "For my businesses, it's had a great impact, it's been very hard  we're waiting for our borders to open. Once the borders open, we'll be ready," she says. "It's been a deep rollercoaster for our businesses  it's been very hard. But there's also a positive: it gives us time to create." While the Northern Territory Chief Minister has given no indication when the NT's borders could reopen, Tess is hopeful tourists from across the country could return in time for the tropical summer in October. "My favourite thing about the tropical summer in the Northern Territory, especially here in Litchfield, is that the spring-fed waterfalls are bursting and there's just so much water," Tess says. "That's when you get the very best of the wet season up here. "My message for all Australians is to come up to the NT [when it opens], because we do have a unique Aboriginal culture up here, we have beautiful waterfalls and a beautiful tropical summer." 
There's a blackened spot near the top of the wooden power pole outside the Mallacoota fire station that serves as a constant reminder of the terrible ferocity of the town's black summer. The pole is just metres from the Mallacoota Fire Brigade shed. Five months after the sky turned black and red here, the local brigade captain, Rod Lewis, recalls looking out of his incident control room to see the "massive wall of flame" at their door. "It was pitch black, smoke, embers coming down by the tonne, thousands of embers," he remembers.  "It was coming down like a torrential rainstorm with red embers catching everything on fire." He estimates the fire was towering 30 metres into the sky. "Radiant heat somewhere up around 800 to 1,000 degrees Celsius. It was extremely hot," Mr Lewis said. "The ground was just erupting in flames." He said "fireballs" were flying across the area and one hit the power pole. Then the fire station itself was alight, forcing firefighters to turn their hoses on their own building. "That fire station had to survive for the recovery process and the management of the fire," Mr Lewis said. Mallacoota lost more than 100 homes in the blazes that raged in and around the town. But the fire station was saved. At the time, Rod Lewis's own family were among those inside.  As well as preserving human life, his priority was saving people's homes and protecting the local school, which is a few streets deeper into the community. He said the fire station was the last line of defence. "The centre of the town is behind us, [the] school, petrol stations, central business area. That had to be protected at all costs." He said the school was particularly important to save because getting students back there would be vital in the recovery. The fire ended up jumping the road and getting into the back of the school, but the damage was limited. The school has become an important focal point for the renewal of Mallacoota. Principal Tim Cashmore, known in the classroom as Mr C, is responsible for students ranging from five to 18 years old. He said many families with children at the school were affected by the fires and five lost everything. Three members of staff also lost their houses. "It's a long, grieving recovery process," he said.  "The volunteer firefighters literally saved our town. "One of our students was one of the firefighters, he's a very brave boy, doing his year 12." He said many other students put themselves forward to help others in a multitude of ways. Just when the children returned to school after the fires, hungry for companionship, the coronavirus pandemic sent most back into self-isolation. Mr Cashmore and his staff are now preparing for students to return on Tuesday, with a new world of coronavirus restrictions to navigate.  He anticipates the fires will hold some children back.  "There is evidence that kids will regress," he said.  "But we have also found that kids catch up really quickly when they are ready." One of the ceremonial duties that will be performed will be the handover of special mementos made by the junior students individually for each volunteer emergency worker who helped fight the Mallacoota fires. The lovingly crafted figurines made in each worker's image are lined up ready to be presented when school comes back. One has even been made for fire captain Rod Lewis, complete with a dusting of black ash.  "There won't be a dry eye in the house when they get handed over," Mr Cashmore said. 
The British Government is facing accusations of hypocrisy after it was revealed that Prime Minister Boris Johnson's top adviser, Dominic Cummings, travelled more than 400km to his parents' house during a nationwide lockdown. Local media reported that Mr Cummings, who lives in London, was seen at his parents' property in north-east England at the end of March.  The UK's lockdown, which began March 23, stipulated that people should remain at their primary residence, leaving only for essential local errands and exercise, and not visit relatives. Anyone with symptoms was told to completely isolate themselves. Local police said that officers went to a house on March 31 and, "explained to the family the guidelines around self-isolation and reiterated the appropriate advice around essential travel."  The previous day, Downing Street had announced that Mr Cummings was self-isolating with symptoms of COVID-19. Mr Johnson's office said in a statement that Mr Cummings made the trip because his wife was showing coronavirus symptoms, he thought he was likely to also get sick, and relatives had offered to help look after the couple's young son. It said Mr Cummings stayed in a house "near to but separate from" his extended family. "Owing to his wife being infected with suspected coronavirus and the high likelihood that he would himself become unwell, it was essential for Dominic Cummings to ensure his young child could be properly cared for," a Downing Street spokesman said. "At no stage was he or his family spoken to by the police about this matter, as is being reported. His actions were in line with coronavirus guidelines. Mr Cummings believes he behaved reasonably and legally."  The local police force has since spoken and says it stands by its statement. The opposition Labour Party has called for an urgent inquiry into the matter. "The British people have made important and painful sacrifices to support the national effort, including being away from family in times of need," Rachel Reeves, Labour's cabinet office minister in waiting, wrote in a letter to the country's most senior civil servant Mark Sedwill. "It is therefore vital that the government can reassure the public that its most senior figures have been adhering to the same rules as everyone else." Speaking to reporters outside his home, Mr Cummings says he did "the right thing" in making the trip. He said to reporters: "Who cares about good looks. It's a question of doing the right thing. It's not about what you guys think." Transport Secretary Grant Shapps said Mr Cummings had the backing of Mr Johnson. "I can tell you that the PM provides Mr Cummings with his full support," he said. One of Mr Johnson's most senior ministers, Michael Gove, said of the situation: "Caring for your wife and child is not a crime." Mr Cummings was one of the architects of the Brexit campaign, and was later appointed Johnson's top aide. He is one of several senior UK officials who have been accused of flouting the lockdown rules that they advocated for the rest of the country. Epidemiologist Neil Ferguson stepped down as government scientific adviser earlier this month after a newspaper disclosed that his girlfriend had crossed London to stay with him during the lockdown. In April, Catherine Calderwood resigned as Scotland's chief medical officer after twice travelling from Edinburgh to her second home. When Mr Cummings was asked if he would consider his position, he told reporters: "Obviously not." ABC/ Wires 
A Darwin pub has been issued a warning by Northern Territory Police for failing to comply with coronavirus regulations on Friday night, while another voluntarily shut its doors after being "overwhelmed" by patrons. The incidents come as one Darwin venue says in-venue coronavirus safety measures are, at times, not working or proving difficult to manage. "The restrictions, I don't know how well thought out they were. We do our best to follow them and we encourage our patrons to follow them," said Matt Mulga, owner of Lola's Pergola in Cullen Bay. "A two-hour restriction, you're encouraging a pub crawl; you're encouraging patrons to go from this bar to that bar to that bar." Mr Mulga said he'd witnessed people leave his venue, go to a nearby restaurant and then come back in half an hour.  "I'm sure we'll look back at [restrictions easing rules] and say they were ill-conceived  and I'm sure the Government will admit that," Mr Mulga said. "If we don't have places like this open, instead we have [house] places where there's no control." Northern Territory pubs, bars and restaurants are open to the public under the proviso customers stay for a maximum of two hours and adhere to physical distancing, a 10-patron table limit is enforced, and that meals are served with alcohol. Morris D'Arrigo, the operations manager at Six Tanks Brew Co in the Darwin CBD, said constantly advising  people to follow the rules when they were drinking was a challenge. "It's a bit of education, coaching, training to let people know this is for their safety," Mr D'Arrigo said. "If it saves my grandmother and my kids, so be it. Let's follow it and I'm sure businesses look at it that way." NT Police Acting Commander Shaun Gill said the warning issued to the Darwin premises on Friday night was "in relation to service of alcohol without meals". Police said the other venue, which closed its doors, was not at fault and did "a very good job" after "a large crowd on very short notice" attended the premises. "The one that was really busy actually had a plan in place  [but] they were unable to deal with the public due to the number of people that arrived", Acting Commander Gill said. "To their credit, they actually closed their doors and no longer served because they couldn't abide by the COVID-19 restrictions." Police said rather than issue the venue with a warning, officers "offered some education" on how it could comply with operating regulations. Despite the two separate instances, Acting Commander Gill said "the public were fairly good and the numbers were fairly low" across the evening in Darwin. "This is just a timely reminder for all involved that the onus is on individuals as well as licensed premises that they have to adhere to restrictions," he said. Police did not disclose the name of either of the venues but said they may be named if problems persisted. No venues have received a fine for breaching coronavirus safety regulations since stage two restriction easing commenced in the Northern Territory on May 15. The fine for breach of coronavirus safety regulations for NT venues is $5,000. Acting Commander Gill said NT Police would continue to take a conciliatory approach with businesses and venues in the early phases of restriction easing before dishing out fines. "We want to give some education to start with and then we want to give [venues] some warning," he said. "To give them an opportunity to comply and then after that, if they continue to fail, then infringement notices will be issued." Police said it was imperative venues and patrons stuck to the 10-person-per-table limit and that 1.5-metre physical distancing was non-negotiable. "People need to be reminded that we're still coming out of a serious event. We're only in the [early] stages of going out of some severe restrictions," Acting Commander Gill said. "The ramifications are that we could end up where we were before." 
The British Prime Minister's chief adviser, Dominic Cummings, is refusing to quit over reports he broke coronavirus lockdown rules, despite several Conservative MPs adding to calls for his resignation.  Meanwhile, with the US death toll approaching 100,000, The New York Times has printed "just 1 per cent of the toll" on its front page. It came as people across the country got out of their houses for the unofficial start of summer. This story was regularly updated throughout Sunday. This story is no longer being updated. For the latest coronavirus news and updates, follow this story. Boris Johnson's chief adviser is refusing to quit over reports he broke coronavirus lockdown rules, despite several Conservative MPs now joining calls for his resignation. Dominic Cummings, who masterminded the 2016 Brexit campaign, travelled over 400 kilometres to his parents' house during a nationwide lockdown. His wife was showing COVID-19 symptoms at the time. The Prime Minister's office said Mr Cummings visited his parents to ensure his young son could be properly cared for, but the Opposition Labour Party said he flouted the Government's own advice. Mr Cummings told reporters he had no intention of stepping aside when asked if he was going to "consider [his] position". "Obviously not. Don't think so. You guys are probably about as right about that as you were about Brexit," he said. Conservative MPs Steve Baker, Simon Hoare and Damian Collins called for Mr Cummings' resignation on Sunday.  "It is intolerable that Boris' Government is losing so much political capital," Mr Baker wrote on Twitter.  "Dominic Cummings must go." Fellow Conservative MP Damian Collins said Mr Cummings "has a track record of believing that the rules don't apply to him and treating the scrutiny that should come to anyone in a position of authority with contempt". "The Government would be better without him," he said. On Sunday, Transport Minister Grant Shapps, speaking on BBC, said he would not resign. With the US coronavirus death toll expected to surpass 100,000 in the coming days, The New York Times dedicated its front page to 1,000 of those killed by the virus. Page one of its Sunday edition listed the names, ages and brief details of some of the virus victims with the headline, "US deaths near 100,000, an incalculable loss". "They were not simply names on a list. They were us," the front page read. "Numbers alone cannot possibly measure the impact of the coronavirus on America, whether it is the number of patients treated, jobs interrupted or lives cut short. "The 1,000 people here reflect just 1 per cent of the toll. None were mere numbers." The paper said it drew from 1,000 obituaries and death notices in hundreds of US newspapers to highlight the pandemic's individual human toll. The Victorian Government has announced a further easing of coronavirus restrictions, including the reopening of outdoor playgrounds and skate parks, from this Tuesday. On June 1, overnight stays at private residences and tourist accommodation will be allowed, and people will be allowed to have gatherings of 20 people in their homes. Public libraries, entertainment and cultural venues and zoos will also be reopened with numbers limited. The state recorded one further COVID-19 case on Saturday, while another case was reclassified as positive, bringing the total tally to 1,603. Authorities in NSW, where there has been just one new case of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, has announced beauty and tanning salons and nail bars will be allowed to reopen from June 1. Gyms will remain closed for now, however. NSW Health Minister Brad Hazzard said his office received frequent requests for salons to reopen over the past three months. "It hascertainly been a very earnest effortfrom a lot of people to make sure wecould open [the salons]," he said. Mr Hazzard advised those beauty business would need to have "a COVID-safe plan" before they reopened, and adhere to 1.5-metre social distancing. He said he was keen to get gyms open as soon as possible, but NSW Health was working with the gym industry on the safety elements involved in reopening. Millions of Muslims around the world are celebrating Eid-al-Fitr, which marks the end of the holy fasting month of Ramadan.  While Muslims are used to celebrating the holiday with large gatherings and congregational prayers, this year the annual holiday has been practised differently amid coronavirus restrictions. In the Middle East, Muslim faithful prayed outside closed gates leading to the Al Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem's Old City as the holy site remained closed amid coronavirus restrictions. In Malaysia, where more than 7,000 people are infected with coronavirus and 115 have died, many Muslim hospital workers spent the day at work. Muslims continued to congregate for Eid prayers on the streets in Indonesia despite government advice to worship at home. However, most worshippers followed the coronavirus guidelines by wearing masks and distancing themselves from each other during prayer. In Pakistan, Muslims held Eid prayers while maintaining social-distancing rules, in accordance with government rules.  More than 1,000 people joined public prayers at an open field in Karachi. Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi says any lawsuits brought against China over the COVID-19 have "zero factual basis in law or international precedence."  Mr Wang told reporters at a news conference on Sunday that China was a victim of the global pandemic alongside other countries and had reached out to assist other governments in need.  "To our regret, in addition to the raging of the new coronavirus, a political virus is also spreading in the US which is to take every chance to attack and discredit China," Mr Wang said. "Some US politicians, heedless of basic facts, have fabricated too many lies and plotted too many conspiracies." Raising such lawsuits "tramples on the international rule of law and abandons the human conscience. It's untrue, unjustifiable and illegal," Mr Wang said.  Those who would bring such litigation against China are "living in a daydream and will humiliate themselves". Many Americans have had their first big break from coronavirus shutdowns for Memorial Day weekend, flocking to beaches and outdoor areas for the unofficial start of the US summer. In Florida, surfside restaurant The Back Porch was packed despite operating at 50 per cent seating capacity to ensure chairs and umbrellas could be appropriately distanced. Newcomers had to wait for places to become free before they could enter. In Arizona, holiday travellers looking for access to some of the desert's canyons and other natural features caused a 24-kilometre traffic jam on the highway, according to the Arizona Department of Transportation. Some recreation areas, including the popular reservoir at Saguaro Lake, became so crowded that authorities had to shut them down. While the Memorial Day holiday that honours fallen members of the US military is on Monday, the weekend leading up to it marks the unofficial start of summer, with Americans traditionally flocking to beaches, gathering at backyard barbecues and unfurling picnic blankets in parks. Arlington National Cemetery, which holds veterans of US conflicts, remained open only to family pass holders who must have a face covering to enter. Access was granted to visit gravesites only, with no touring allowed. In rain-soaked New York, the epicentre of the US coronavirus crisis, Governor Andrew Cuomo discussed his decision to allow up to 10 people to attend ceremonies honouring military veterans, warning that social distancing and face masks should be part of any plans to get together. State beaches in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut were reopened, but rain kept most people away. Elsewhere, Mount Rushmore National Memorial in South Dakota welcomed visitors again on Saturday, earlier than expected. The Northern Territory Government has confirmed restrictions on travel within the NT will be lifted in less than a fortnight. Chief Minister Michael Gunner said the biosecurity zones  limiting travel to remote communities  will be removed almost two weeks ahead of schedule. It comes after land councils called for the travel restrictions to be lifted at the same time as other coronavirus restrictions are eased on June 5. The Government said the interstate travel restrictions would remain in place indefinitely. Prime Minister Scott Morrison has taken responsibility for a $60 billion JobKeeper miscalculation but dubbed an effort to demand answers from the Treasurer a political stunt. A Labor-led coronavirus parliamentary committee will seek to compel Treasurer Josh Frydenberg to explain how the Federal Government overestimated the JobKeeper wage subsidy program by $60 billion. "But what it means is Australians won't have to borrow as much money," Mr Morrison said.  Opposition Senate Leader Penny Wong said a COVID-19 committee examining Government measures in response to the coronavirus wanted to quiz the Treasurerabout the mistake. "The chair of the Senate Committee, Senator [Katy] Gallagher ... will call Josh Frydenberg to give evidence," she said. "What I would say to Josh: 'This is your opportunity to front up and explain $60 billion blunder to the Parliament and to the Australian people'." Meanwhile, the Government's COVIDSafe app has hit six million downloads, still below the 40 per cent rate cited by the Government as the minimum needed for the app to be effective. Clive Palmer says he will lodge documents with the High Court this week, arguing Western Australia's border closure is unconstitutional. The mining magnate wanted to visit WA for meetings with businesspeople, senator Mathias Cormann and potential 2021 state election candidates for his United Australia Party, but was rejected due to coronavirus restrictions. "Closing down the border is not only an act of stupidity by WA Premier Mark McGowan, but it is against the Australian constitution and I am confident the High Court will see it that way as well," Mr Palmer said in a statement on Sunday. Mr Palmer said he would lodge the legal documents on Monday and hoped to have a directions hearing in the High Court by the end of the week. Mr McGowan said on Friday he endorsed the WA Police Commissioner's decision not to grant Mr Palmer an exemption from the travel ban. The city of Wuhan, the original epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak in China, conducted 1,470,950 nucleic acid tests for the virus on Friday, the local health authority said. Some 1,000,729 tests had been completed the previous day. By comparison, as of Friday, Australia had conducted more than 1,192,262 tests since the outbreak began. Wuhan kicked off a campaign on May 14 to look for asymptomatic carriers  infected people who show no outward sign of illness  after confirming on May 9-10 its first cluster of COVID-19 infections since its lockdown was lifted on April 8. Authorities have said they aim to test all 11 million of the city's residents, an exercise likely to cost more than 1 billion yuan ($220 million). China on Saturday reported no new confirmed cases for the first time since it began announcing infections in January. Brazil has prohibited most foreigners from entering the country for another 30 days. The country is home to the second-highest number of confirmed coronavirus infections in the world after the United States. Commercial traffic is not affected by the measure and Brazilians and local residents will be allowed to enter. The decision was published in the official Gazette on Friday night, citing "health reasons". Brazil has reported more than 330,000 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and more than 21,000 deaths. Experts consider those numbers under counts because of the lack of widespread testing. US President Donald Trump went on his first golf outing since the coronavirus pandemic broke out, visiting his club in the Washington suburbs in a purposeful display of normalcy. Mr Trump's motorcade took him from the White House to Trump National Golf Club, and he was spotted wearing a white cap and white polo shirt. It was his first time at a golf property since March 8, when he visited his club in West Palm Beach, Florida. That was the same weekend when he met at his Mar-a-Lago retreat with Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro, whose press secretary later tested positive for the virus. Some White House staffers who had been in contact with the press aide went into quarantine afterward but none tested positive. Mr Trump is eager to promote the idea that the United States is returning to normal, although the death toll from the coronavirus outbreak continues to rise. Mr Trump's coronavirus task force coordinator, Deborah Birx, told a White House briefing on Friday that Americans over this Memorial Day weekend should "be outside, play golf, play tennis with marked balls, go to the beach  but stay six feet apart". The Department of Agriculture in Guam has invited hunters to participate in a pig-hunting derby to provide food for families in need during the coronavirus pandemic.  The two-day derby is scheduled to begin next Saturday, the Pacific Daily News reported.  The department released a statement saying the derby was intended to feed families, foster familial hunter development and reduce the feral pig population.  Event organisers are working with mayors to distribute pigs whole and unprocessed to residents within their villages and provide safe handling guidelines. A 107-year-old Iranian woman who was infected with coronavirus has recovered, Iran's semi-official Fars news agency has reported. The woman, Saltanat Akbari, was admitted to the Khansari hospital in the central city of Arak.  She was released from the hospital after spending "some time" in isolation. "She defeated the virus with the help of doctors and nurses at the hospital," the report said. Iran is one of the most affected countries in the Middle East, with 133,521 cases and 7,359 deaths.  Russia on Sunday reported 153 coronavirus deaths over the past 24 hours, the epidemic's highest daily toll, raising total fatalities to 3,541, the country's coronavirus crisis response centre said. It also said 8,599 new cases had been documented, fewer than on the previous day, pushing the nationwide tally of infections to 344,481. More than 40 people have tested positive for COVID-19 after attending a religious service in Germany. The service was held at a church in Frankfurt on May 10, after lockdown restrictions were eased. Church officials said they adhered to social-distancing rules, and had disinfected the building ahead of the service. Germany has recorded low numbers of coronavirus compared to much of Western Europe, allowing the country to ease restrictions over the past two weeks. Several thousand followers of Spain's far-right Vox party have gathered in Madrid and other cities to protest the Government's handling of the coronavirus outbreak. Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez announced that the country would reopen for international tourism from July, as the country emerges from one of Europe's strictest lockdowns. Its football league will be allowed to resume from June 8. Vox called for protesters to come in their cars and motorbikes to skirt the current prohibition on social gatherings in effect under a two-month long state of emergency. "Let your desire be heard for the resignation of the Government," Vox leader Santiago Abascal said from the open-top bus leading the cars inching down a Madrid boulevard. Vox called the protest the 'Caravan for Spain and Liberty'. Most cars were decked with Spanish flags and there were also small groups of people who participated on foot, with some not respecting the two-metre social distancing rules.  More protests were held in Barcelona, Sevilla and other provincial capitals. Over 28,000 Spaniards have been confirmed to have died from COVID-19. The lockdown successfully reduced the daily contagion rate of over 20 per cent at the height of the crisis to under 1 per cent for the past week. Hundreds of deaths from "coronavirus-like symptoms" have raised fears COVID-19 is rapidly spreading undetected throughout war-torn Yemen, where the United Nations and medical workers say the health care system "has in effect collapsed". According to official numbers, Yemen has confirmed 212 infections and 39 deaths, but with one of lowest rates of testing in the world, aid workers fear this figure is "just the tip of the iceberg". Medicins Sans Frontieres reported on Friday as many as 80 people were dying at home per day  up from a pre-outbreak norm of 10  in the city of Aden, where the international aid group run the only dedicated COVID-19 centre in southern Yemen. This week Jens Laerke, spokesman for the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, told a Geneva briefing that afterfive years of war and now a pandemic, "Yemen is really on the brink" and its health system "has in effect collapsed". Medical workers in southern Yemen told the ABC that some staff had been detained or threatened by authorities for sharing information about the outbreak on social media. Sources inside Yemen say there are no lockdown measures, curfews or social distancing in place. A new cluster of coronavirus infections has broken out in Malaysia at a detention centre for undocumented migrants, authorities have confirmed. Malaysia has this month arrested more than 2,000 foreigners for not having permits that allow them to be in the country following raids in areas under lockdown. The centres they are detained in are often crowded, with dozens of migrants packed in a single cell. The United Nations and rights groups have called on Malaysia to stop the crackdown and criticised authorities for going after a vulnerable community during the pandemic. The South-East Asian country has so far reported 7,185 virus infections and 115 deaths. The health ministry said on Saturday that 21 cases were identified at the Semenyih detention centre near the capital Kuala Lumpur, which houses around 1,600 detainees. It is the second detention centre at which a cluster of virus infections has broken out. Around 60 cases were reported among the 1,400 detainees at the Bukit Jalil centre earlier this week. In recent weeks, there has been public anger towards refugees and other foreigners, who have been accused of spreading disease, burdening the state and taking jobs as the economy plummets.  Rohingya refugees in particular have been targets of harassment and threats. Thailand has begun testing a vaccine against the coronavirus on monkeys after positive trials in mice, an official says. Thailand's Minister of Higher Education, Science, Research and Innovation, Suvit Maesincee, said researchers had moved testing of the vaccine to monkeys and hoped to have a "clearer outcome" of its effectiveness by September. "This project is for the human race, not just Thais," Dr Suvit told reporters on Saturday. The Prime Minister has outlined a policy that we must develop a vaccine and join the world community workforce on this." Thailand announced on Wednesday it was developing a vaccine  one of at least 100 potential vaccines in the works worldwide  and hoped to have it into production by next year. The vaccine candidate being tested by Bangkok's Chualongkorn University and two public sector partners harnesses messenger RNA technology, which unlike older types of vaccine does not contain any of the virus it seeks to attack. It instead uses part of the virus's genetic code to ultimately produce antibodies inside the human body. Thailand has several active COVID-19 vaccine-development projects, including separate cooperative efforts with China and the United States. ABC/Reuters/AP/AAP 
China has recorded no new confirmed COVID-19 cases on the mainland for the first time since the pandemic began in the central city of Wuhan late last year.  However, it had continued to see an influx of imported cases, mainly involving Chinese nationals returning from abroad The National Health Commission (NHC) said in a statement on Saturday (local time) there had been no daily rise in the number of cases compared to four new cases on the previous day.  It said, however, there were two new suspected cases: an imported one in Shanghai and locally transmitted case in the north-eastern province of Jilin. New asymptomatic cases of the coronavirus fell to 28 from 35 a day earlier, the NHC said. China had seen a sharp fall in locally transmitted cases since March as major restrictions on people movement helped it to take control of the epidemic in many parts of the country. However, it had continued to see an influx of imported cases, mainly involving Chinese nationals returning from abroad, while new clusters of infections in the north-eastern border provinces of Jilin and Heilongjiang have emerged in recent weeks. Wuhan also reported this month its first cluster of infections since a lockdown on the city ended on April 8, prompting authorities to warn that counter-epidemic measures could not be relaxed and to launch a campaign to test all of Wuhan's 11 million residents for COVID-19. There are still some restrictions in place for locals, as people with the virus are still being monitored and treated. China's Government had begun using hyper-vigilant measures to track and trap remaining cases. The first case of the virus was identified in China's Hubei province and believed to have originated from The Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market in Wuhan. While Wuhan China had been the epicentre of the outbreak for many months, South America has become a new epicentre of the COVID-19 pandemic with Brazil hardest-hit.  Cases are rising in some African countries that so far have a relatively low death toll, the World Health Organization (WHO) said. "The COVID-19 pandemic today reached a milestone in Africa, with more than 100,000 confirmed cases. The virus has now spread to every country in the continent since the first case was confirmed in the region 14 weeks ago," the WHO said in a statement, noting there were 3,100 confirmed deaths on the vast continent. Wuhan has a population of more than 11 million people, which is greater than New York City, where more than 10,000 people have died because of COVID-19. Many suspect China's official figures remain conservative, speculating there were more victims in the early weeks of the outbreak who died without being tested. On Saturday afternoon, the number of confirmed cases in the mainland stood at 82,971 and the death toll remained unchanged at 4,634.  Reuters/AP 
With Josh Frydenberg staring down the barrel of the biggest budget deficits in Australian history, getting a call on Thursday night from the Treasury Secretary saying he's found $60 billion down the back of the couch gives the man holding the nation's tattered chequebook a modicum of relief. It's a massive amount of coin and will give the books a considerable boost as the Government plots a course out of the coronavirus economic slump. But the bureaucratic bungle which revealed Treasury had over-forecast the impact of the Coalition's JobKeeper wage subsidy program also opens the Federal Government to demands it needs to be more generous. The original bill was to be $130 billion, and more than 6 million workers would be supported. It's now clear only $70 billion will be spent and 3.5 million employees given a financial leg up. On a more basic level, the Government's critics will use this episode as an example of general administrative incompetence, wondering how the alarm bells weren't ringing in Treasury and the ATO when businesses registering for JobKeeper were making mistakes in the form. That, and why no-one stopped to think the numbers should perhaps have been lower given Australia was not hit as hard by the virus as the Government had anticipated when it did its original calculations, will also need to be addressed. It's not like they simply forgot to carry the one. The ATO and Treasury believe it was 1,000 businesses that caused the error but no doubt the boffins behind the scenes are scrambling to check, and double-check, their maths to make sure their future forecasts are watertight. The departments have put the error down to the fact that they were busy shovelling millions to the people that actually were eligible, but whether that reasoning stacks up will no doubt be debated at length in the weeks and months to come. Putting aside (just for a moment) the administrative muck-up, the Federal Government will be hit with a refreshed campaign to expand which workers benefit from the support scheme. That issue has been bubbling away ever since JobKeeper was announced at the end of March, as the nation's businesses grappled with new coronavirus lockdown rules sending them to the wall. Casual workers, staff in the university sector and the nation's creatives left floundering by the shutdown of the arts industry are among those on the list of potential beneficiaries if the scheme was adjusted. Labor has been lobbying for those tweaks, even though the party backed JobKeeper through Parliament at the height of the crisis  Anthony Albanese not wanting to let "the perfect be the enemy of the good" at a time when the country was being hit by the twin health and fiscal threats posed by COVID-19. Given the Government had already planned on spending $60 billion more than is now needed, the argument will be that there's no point writing that spending off as a happy symptom of an economy not struggling as much as had been feared. In other words, Josh Frydenberg should just press on and spend, spend, spend. His Assistant Treasurer, Michael Sukkar, was the Government's frontman on Saturday when those questions were being thrown around and downplayed any suggestion JobKeeper could be opened up to more Australians. "The money, as I said, is borrowed money," he told Channel Seven. "It's not a pot of money, sitting there just waiting to be spent and waiting for the Government to decide how to spend it.  "The parameters of the scheme are broad." Mr Sukkar was grilled about eligibility for the scheme by the ABC's Raf Epstein on May 14, just a week ago. "You and I would perhaps be having a different conversation today if you said to me 'Michael, there are only 3 million employees who are covered, it's half what we expected?' In that case, I would be saying to you, 'yeah, look, there's more of a likelihood of wholesale changes'" A review of the program is due next month and the Government appears keen to manage community expectations ahead of that  using whatever the findings are to justify any changes into the future, rather than jumping at its newly found, slightly less debt-laden status.   
The consumer watchdog is investigating a luxury houseboat company in northern Victoria after it refused to refund holidaymakers thousands of dollars for bookings lost to the COVID-19 outbreak. One would-be holidaymaker says he has been left $30,000 out of pocket Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) chair Rod Simms told ABC Statewide Drive about 20 people had complained they couldn't get their money back from Echuca Luxury Houseboats, even though the company had not provided the service because of coronavirus restrictions. Mr Simms described the company's behaviour as "appalling".  "The company should be treating its customers a lot more fairly than that," Mr Simms said. Insurance Broker Don McLardy said he paid almost $30,000 to use a houseboat over Easter but was unable to take the holiday because of travel restrictions. He said he was unable to get a response from Echuca Luxury Houseboats about his money. "We are quite happy to have a replacement trip next Easter or the Easter after that but we've had a lack of response and have pretty much been shut down from Echuca Houseboats," Mr McLardy said.  Gisborne local Suzette Hare said she spent $4,000 on a booking with the company but was told she was not entitled to a refund because she didn't have travel insurance.  "So there was no offer of a rebooking, which was what I was after," Ms Hare said. "No credit, no refund, no nothing." Queenslander Phil Beresford, said he was out of pocket $1,500 and was also told he needed travel insurance. He said he lodged a complaint with VCAT after the company refused to negotiate other options, like a voucher. "It's not their fault that this happened, and it's not our fault," Mr Beresford said. "But to say that we've got to take the full burden of it and that they were going to be fine, it just seems ludicrous and very unconscionable." Mr Simms said it was misleading to tell people they needed travel insurance to get a refund. "Most travel insurance won't cover this anyway. The bigger issue is what are the rights that these customers have," Mr Simms said. He said in most instances consumers did have a right to a refund. "The only times when you won't be entitled to that refund is when there are terms and conditions which specify another remedy, when the situation is outside the control of the company," he said. "(Then) they are entitled to a voucher that is actually usable." Mr Simms said the ACCC's priority in the investigation would be to get a fair deal for consumers. "We've dealt with literally dozens of companies, and we've got a lot of companies to change their policies and treat their customers fairly, so I'd like to think we've had a lot of success," Mr Simms said. He said there would be serious consequences if the company was found to have misled customers. "We can take them to court and the penalties can be up to $10 million," Mr Simms said. Ms Hare told ABC Statewide Drive that, since unhappy customers went public, the company had offered her a full voucher. "I am yet to make a decision about that," Ms Hare said. "This has been a very difficult situation that we have been in and it has not left me feeling very positive about a future booking with this business." Echuca Luxury Houseboats' owner Andrews McKenzie said the company was working in "good faith" to provide the best outcomes for customers. "We are in the process of drafting correspondence to our impacted customers, which will outline our offer of a voucher that they will be able to use over the next three years," Mr McKenzie said. 
Much like the neighbourhood milk bar, the international food hall was once a staple of suburban Australian life. After fading out of Australian life over the past two decades, the humble food court is now making a quiet comeback, offering authentic, cheap and culturally diverse dining experiences in a modern era of well-travelled taste buds and colourful Instagram foodie blogs. "I think people are going back to the food court now because the quality is getting better," Malaysian Chinese chef Vincent Lim said. "It's still cheap but it's good quality now. You hang around with your friends, you can have some beer." The food court boom began in Australia in the 1970s, with one of the first being the stand-alone Sun Markets in Perth's CBD. "You'd see the bain-maries sitting there with this slick layer of oil across the top," Suresh Rajan, head of WA's Ethnic Communities Council, recalled. "You'd go to the Chinese place for example, you'd have some curry there, you'd have sweet and sour, Mongolian lamb, fried rice and some noodles and you got a combination. "It was the most horrific things you could ever eat because you literally had everything piled on to one plate. But it was cheap. "It was a real novelty  everyone went to Sun Market because it was a place you could get a meal that gave you exposure to a different variety of cuisine." That messy buffet style was replicated across many suburban food courts, long before the concept was adopted by commercial shopping centres to include the standard array of fast-food restaurants. "We always described it as Anglicised Chinese food," Mr Rajan said. "It wasn't your traditional Chinese food, it was really designed for the Western palate. "It wasn't for the traditional Singaporean market, for example, because they'd make most of these dishes at home." Mr Rajan said as the travelling public's tastes become more refined, the overseas cuisines on offer in Australia became more sophisticated. "It just seemed that the run-of-the-mill restaurants were providing what had previously been only available at the fine dining restaurants," he said. "We Aussies really don't pay for service or the flashy accompaniments that go with a meal, we want a good tasting meal and a good price." Food blogger Mary Noonan said she believed the rise of food trucks and the explosion of "foodie" culture on social media had encouraged people to be more adventurous. "In the past, people used to only like to go out to places that served spaghetti bolognaise, or steak and mash, or fish and chips," she said. "People were only having food that they were comfortable with, or food they were having at home already. "I'm finding over time people are becoming more willing to explore." Ms Noonan said support for food courts was on the rise after years of public disdain. "We're finding that a lot of places are now doing tapas, shared plates and food courts cater for that," she said. "You can go there with everyone and everyone will find something that they're happy with. "I think there's no excuse anymore to not have good quality food, especially in WA where we've got fresh produce everywhere." Mr Rajan said families and students were behind the resurgence. "You're seeing more and more relationships between the various cultural groups," he said. "Particularly in families where you have intercultural marriages where someone has the traditional Anglo cuisines verses something that originated in India. "You've got a family of five or six people, each with different tastes. "I can go to the Malaysian place and have the fish head curry. The fish head curry would be something that no one else makes, but I'll have that there.  "I have it almost every time  but no one else in my family would eat that." Nestled deep in suburban Perth is Spencer Village Food Court, which is recognised as one of the city's the most authentic examples of a Singaporean or Malaysian hawkers market. Tiny kitchens serving traditional meals from South-East Asia and beyond are grouped around a no-frills dining hall that often reaches its capacity. It opened 30 years ago, initially to serve a high concentration of Chinese immigrants and international students in nearby suburbs, but has since built a reputation that reaches far beyond the local area. "Food courts like Spencer Village represent a familiar cultural experience to our multicultural society," said the centre's manager, Cameron Hopkins. "The food is authentic to their origin, as is the dining experience." Danny Hung has run his tiny Malaysian kitchen at Spencer Village for almost 20 years. He said families were brought together around cooking familiar to their roots. "All the Malaysian, Chinese, Indonesian, Singaporean, Thai  everyone  they come here, they have a lot of choice and they're looking for their own flavour, their own food," he said. "Lots of Asian families love to come here  one order there, one order there, the whole family will sit down with each other and enjoy a meal." Joppy Sai recently opened his Thai outlet at Spencer Village after operating a stall at a nearby market for 10 years. "If you think about Asian food hall, this is the first one they'd have to think of. It would have to be," he said. "When it's busy, there's no seats available, we can only do takeaway. "It's multicultural people, Australian, New Zealand, African or any Asian. People across the world come. "We all help each other out when somebody has an issue  maybe there's a leaking tap or something  everyone just comes and helps." Mr Lim said the Australian food courts that succeeded were the ones that created a buzzing atmosphere. "In [the hawkers food courts] in Malaysia and Singapore, you actually see the chef cooking your food right in front of you," he said. "You can talk to the chef, tell him more chilli or less. You're running around with your friends, there's hundreds and hundreds of people. It's a vibe. "You really taste something homemade, something like your grandma's cooking." Mr Lim said Spencer Village replicated that experience on a smaller scale. "Even though they're still cooking behind walls, you see [the chefs] walking around, talking, yelling, shouting to each other," he said. "There's definitely a real vibe there for a food court." But even the well established cultural dining hubs are not immune from the perceived threat of coronavirus. Like many Asian food restaurants across the nation, vendors at Spencer Village have reported seeing a drop-off in trade as fears about the outbreak spread. Mr Hopkins said the impact had been minimal at this stage. "Naturally there is some cause for concern, as this seems bigger than SARS, however at this stage customers have been consistent and resilient," he said. "Support for the food court has been widespread, not just limited to people from certain cultural backgrounds. "We hope it stays that way for everyone's sake." Mr Lim said he expected food courts to become even more diverse to reflect the melting pot of culture in modern Australia. "I believe in the next five years you will see a lot more different cuisines from China that weren't here start opening up and taking off," he said. "The last three or four years you've seen lots of Sichuan restaurants opening up, the hot pots. "You will see a lot more cuisines from the north." He said Asian cuisine would continue to grow as more imported ingredients were made available to the Australian market. "Even places run by Western chefs, they'll use a lot of Asian ingredients to make it like a fusion," he said. "It's not just fish and chips anymore. "Even the fish and chips they will put the miso batter or the miso mayo!" 
I'm a sceptical person most days, but I do have my weak moments. Last weekend, Gwyneth Paltrow found me in one of them. This article contains content that is not yet available here. Half way through an episode of the lifestyle guru's Netflix series which explored the Wim Hof breathing method, I was almost on board to have cold showers for the rest of my life.  Wim Hof is not the first person to extol the health benefits of freezing water  friends have told me the same, and if you believe the stereotype, Swedish people thrive off running from saunas to ice lakes. So perhaps my mind was primed to fall for this exact episode of Goop.  There are many reasons why we find pseudoscience persuasive, according to Dr Micah Goldwater, a cognitive scientist at the University of Sydney.  It is often simpler for us to add knowledge than subtract it, he said.  "It's actually much easier to add things to your mental model of how things work than to take things away."  There's also the 'illusory truth effect', where the more familiar something sounds, the more likely you are to believe it's true. In other words, because I've heard so many anecdotes about the power of cold water, when I hear an embellishment dressed up in scientific jargon, I may be more likely to endorse it.  As a journalist who reports on online misinformation, I've spent plenty of time in anti-vaccination Facebook groups or in internet forums that suggest herbal remedies protect against the coronavirus. In those groups, it's easy to observe the seductive nature of personal stories. A friend's nephew whose case of the measles was cured by tea tree oil is more engaging than a dozen dry public health announcements. We're biased to sometimes think narrative detail is linked to accuracy, when that's not always the case. Plenty of engaging, specific examples can capture your emotion and empathy, according to Amanda J. Barnier, a professor of cognitive science at Macquarie University. "Perhaps by identifying with the details, it rips you away from a critical evaluation of the evidence underlying it," she said. One study conducted by Dr Goldwater, which has so far been presented at a conference, attempted to understand the power of positive and negative anecdotes. Participants in the study were assessed on how stories about the impact of medical treatments on 'Jamie' (a fictional person) affected whether they would use the same treatment. Even though they were told that the treatment worked for most people, knowing one negative personal story  about Jamie's symptoms failing to improve  often made study participants report that they would not want to take that treatment. "When you are affected by an anecdote, what you are potentially doing is generalising from a single case to your life," he said. "But it's possible that it just made you feel icky [about the treatment]." It's easy to laugh off Goop's vagina candles, but the threat of medical misinformation shouldn't be taken so lightly, writes Olivia Willis. Humans like explanations that help them predict how the world works. We are constantly thinking about cause and effect. That can lead us to a bias called 'illusory causation', where we interpret a causal effect when there really isn't one. If you take herbal medication for a cold and then get better two days later, you might assume the medicine did the trick. "The bias people have is they don't think, 'wait, what would have happened if I didn't take that herbal medication?'," Dr Goldwater said. "Well, you probably would have gotten better in two days just the same." This is why scientific studies use randomised control trials that give half the test subjects the medicine and half none  to test that assumption. We are also susceptible to what's called the naturalness bias. Put simply, "natural stuff is good and artificial stuff is bad". "It's just this heuristic that helps you make a decision, a shortcut," Dr Goldwater said. There will always be scenarios where that rule does not hold true. This article contains content that is not yet available here. We like explanations and rules, but our problem is that we want them fast. "Critical thinking about information you're presented with often requires people to slow down and think about it carefully and weigh the evidence," Dr Barnier said. She recommends taking your time when dealing with health information, and considering its source. "Who's saying this? And where is the information coming from? And what is it based on?" Dr Goldwater said we must also be willing to interrogate our own beliefs and why we came to conclusions.  "If you are constantly sceptical of your own thinking, that is potentially the best way to vet yourself," he said. But this is a struggle, even if it's your life's work. "If anything, being a cognitive scientist just makes me question my own thinking," he said. "You can always, in retrospect, realise you fell prey to one of these biases, because these are biases that are so ingrained to how we think." 
The WA Government will spend up to $93 million to bring 650 jobs back under state control, in a significant scaling back of privatisation of services at Fiona Stanley Hospital (FSH). The changes to the multi-billion-dollar deal with private provider Serco will see cleaning, catering, orderly and domestic assistant services brought back into the public sector over an 18-month transition. It follows the former Barnett government's decision to privatise non-clinical services at FSH in a 20-year deal with Serco. The McGowan Government said it was scaling back that deal at the first opportunity, with approximately 65 per cent of the Serco staff at FSH to be brought back into the public sector. Unions have celebrated the revised deal but the State Opposition has attacked the arrangement, labelling it the "most irresponsible time to make major changes to the health system" in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak. Premier Mark McGowan announced the new arrangement within minutes of confirming WA had its first suspected case of community transmission of coronavirus. The revised FSH deal will come at a significant cost, with a one-off transition bill of $12.9 million and ongoing costs of $8 million per year over the next decade. But Health Minister Roger Cook said the Government was meeting its pre-election commitment to bring privatised services back into public hands where possible. "We have been able to do this in an affordable way and one that ensures there will be a safe and smooth transition," he said. "What we are doing here is affordable because we have managed the state's finances." Mr Cook said the deal would benefit patients as well as staff. "We know that Western Australians like vital public servants to be in public hands," he said. "The contract itself interfered with seamless patient care. Other services currently provided by Serco will continue until 2027, with the option to extend to 2031. Serco Australia chief executive Mark Irwin said he was pleased much of the contract would continue, but dismissed suggestions it would improve patient care. "The services that we have delivered have been world-class services," he said. United Workers Union secretary Carolyn Smith said the deal was evidence privatisation did not work. "Orderlies could not touch patients and the contract was massively understaffed," she said. The Serco contract came under heavy criticism in its early days, with problems including surgical equipment that had not been properly sterilised and the payment of 200 staff to manage a hospital that had not yet admitted patients. An inquiry chaired by former under treasurer John Langoulant also revealed the $4.3 billion contract was signed without a stand-alone business case, casting doubt on whether the state was getting value for money. The deal also saw Serco paid more than $100 million to run the hospital in 2014, even though at that time it had no patients. 
An iron ore company in Western Australia's East Kimberley has been put into voluntary administration only six months after restarting the mothballed Ridges mine, 165 kilometres south of Kununurra. At a meeting of creditors held on February 25, administrators from KordaMentha were appointed to Gold Valley Iron Ore (GVI), which was given the right to mine the Ridges iron ore deposit owned by Kimberly Metals Group in a deal last year.  It is understood work at Ridges stopped last week while administrators assessed the financial position of its operators from Gold Valley. KordaMentha partner Richard Tucker said early indications were that the company had racked up about $10 million of debt, and that local contractors had been left out of pocket. "Our role since our appointment has been focused on trying to find a solution to recommence operations, such that local businesses and the larger contract creditors could be supported [and] employees could go back to work," he said. "As part of that there's been a lot of good will from both the employees and the major contractors, and we were able to a get a non-binding term sheet where someone would provide several million dollars to recommence operations. "However, unfortunately, events superseded that and the right to mine was terminated by the owner of the mine; so the ability to continue to mine in the existing structure is now unlikely. "Gold Valley Iron has not yet been liquidated, it will be up to creditors to decide the future of that specific entity." Mr Tucker said Kimberley Metals Group owned the tenement, and that it would be up to it to decide on the future of the mine. KMG has been contacted for comment, but the ABC understands the company is making efforts to find a way to get the site back up and running in the coming weeks. It is yet another roadblock for the embattled Ridges iron ore project, which was put into care and maintenance in 2015 by KMG, laying off 220 workers following the mine's closure. The Chinese-owned group began operations in 2011 and also own the undeveloped, higher grade Matsu iron ore deposit 10km south of the Ridges mining operation. The company's chairman, ZhengZeng Du, is also Chair of Tangshan Ganglu Iron and Steel Co. Ltd, which is one of the largest privately-owned steel mills in China. KMG shipped 6.2 million tonnes of high-grade ore to China from the Wyndham Port until it closed its doors four years ago due to poor commodity prices. At the time it was a huge blow to the town, with several other big commodity projects also shutting up shop amidst a mining downturn in the region. East Kimberley Chamber of Commerce president Steve Sharpe said it was disappointing to see local business left out of pocket. "We're not sure of the details of exactly how many local contractors have been affected," he said. "We know there's been a lot of local business keen to support the start-up of the mine. Subscribe for the national headlines of the day. "The possibility that a project like Ridges starting up was bringing to the community, it was a bit of hope for people and it's just really unfortunate this has happened. "It's certainly a huge blow in a region where Argyle diamond mine is heading towards closure, and people are bracing themselves for that." Mr Sharpe said another big resources or infrastructure project was needed to give the region a boost. It has also been a volatile time for iron ore prices in recent weeks due to the coronavirus outbreak. After reaching five year highs last year exceeding $110 USD per tonne, iron ore is now trading at $89 US dollars per dry metric tonne. Mr Tucker said investigations were in their early stages, but several factors had led to the present situation. "It would appear as though it's a combination of the fact it's a relatively low-grade deposit [and] the costs associated with starting up an operation and insufficient working capital to do so," he said. It appeared there were other early signs of trouble for the project when a dispute emerged between Gold Valley and Elmore Limited, a minerals processing company previously trading as IndiOre. A memorandum of understanding was signed last year which proposed Elmore process ore mined by Gold Valley at Ridges on a contractual basis. According to Elmore's quarterly report released on September 30, the company had "secured the mobile processing equipment required" but said it had been "repeatedly held back from commencing the contract".  Elmore "continued to try and work with GVI to resolve the impasse", the report said. Only three months later, Elmore announced to the ASX on January 14 that the mineral processing agreement had been terminated. "The contract stipulates that Elmore will be paid $1 million plus compensation for lost earnings due to the contract being terminated by repudiation," the company said. The announcement also revealed that Gold Valley Iron had started civil action against Elmore over the payment of plant equipment sold to it from a project GVI had acquired called Frances Creek mine in the Northern Territory. By February 17, administrators had been called in from Hall Chadwick, and then replaced by KordaMentha at a creditors meeting later in the month. Since that time several contractors have contacted the ABC and said they have not been paid for their work since Ridges restarted last year. Gold Valley Iron is a Perth-based private explorer that is part of the Gold Valley Group chaired by Singaporean businessman Mr Yuzheng Xie. According to its website the group has interests in mining, agriculture and energy in WA, the Northern Territory and Queensland. ABC has not been able to get in touch with a representative from Gold Valley Iron. 
When  and how  will it be safe for the Kimberley to reopen? It's a question generating plenty of discussion right across the north of Western Australia at the moment, as statewide restrictions designed to halt the spread of COVID-19 begin to ease. Would-be travellers are keen to head north on what's often an annual migration to escape the winter chill. And cut off from the tourist traffic that can make or break their year, businesses across the Kimberley are keen to get them over the border. But with 17 recorded cases, almost all linked to outside travellers, the prospect of a resumption in visitors also carries a degree of concern within the community. While some politicians and business representatives have urged an immediate reopening, community leaders have set their sights on June 18 for the region's tough travel restrictions to be lifted in a 12-point plan, backed by local government, medical and Aboriginal representatives and submitted to the State Government. With the exception of three cases in Broome, the majority of the Kimberley's 17 COVID-19 cases have been linked to travel  particularly locals and critical workers returning from interstate and overseas. The threat of the virus prompted local leaders to call for a lockdown, resulting in a joint State-Federal biosecurity regime enforcing the toughest travel restrictions in WA. Travellers must quarantine outside the region for 14 days, while travel to (but not from) remote Aboriginal Communities is banned under the threat of fines of up to $50,000 and jail time. But with no new cases for more than 40 days, Kimberley Aboriginal Medical Services (KAMS) CEO Vicki O'Donnell said the argument for restrictions was shifting. "In three weeks' time, you'd have to question why we wouldn't lift border security," Ms O'Donnell said. "We have to think about what's going to happen for the next 12 months  because without a vaccine, we are still a high-risk area." KAMS backed the reopening plan, and argued the Government needed to adequately support Kimberley health services to contain any further outbreaks. Access to rapid, widespread testing across the region would also need to be solidified. Any further lockdowns, Ms O'Donnell said, should be strategic and targeted, with provisions to evacuate at-risk patients. "Maybe locking down a town, as opposed to the whole Kimberley," Ms O'Donnell said. "You can't rule out the prospect of community transmission in Perth, and they're going to be moving around. "We're going to get three times more tourists into the Kimberley than we ever had." An outbreak in a remote community remains a nightmare scenario for the Government, and a key factor in their cautious approach to the Kimberley. Health staff, bolstered by reinforcements from Perth at the height of the outbreak, have used the lull in cases to drill how such an outbreak would be handled. Outbreak management plans, detailing how any further cases would be dealt with community-by-community, are also being worked on. Kimberley Land Council acting chief executive Tyronne Garstone said the restrictions were the right step, but the time was right for them to be lifted. "I think the actions put down by the State Government and the Federal Government were right on the mark," Mr Garstone said. "And that's really played a pivotal role in us being able to keep COVID out of the Kimberley." While some communities had experienced positive results including reduced violence, alcohol and drug abuse, the return of large numbers of current and former residents had also posed significant challenges. Mr Garstone hoped governments would continue to pay close attention to the unique nature of the Kimberley and its remote communities when they began easing restrictions. He said it was imperative communities were given the choice to open back up or remain in lockdown. "They have to understand that each community has their own threshold in regards to removing some of the restrictions," Mr Garstone said. "They'll have to be approached individually and asked, 'Are you comfortable with removal of some of the restrictions?'" While the Government's lack of immediate support left many in the region disappointed, the unified plan may ultimately count in the Kimberley's favour. A unified push from community leaders played a key role in the Government bringing restrictions in and could be a similar factor in them being lifted. "It's always great when you hear a clearly articulated, unified message from the community," Health Minister Roger Cook said. "I'm really quite excited by it and keen to engage." While stopping short of committing to the June 18 date, he said the Government was already working to extricate the region from the "clumsy" Federal biosecurity arrangements that expire on that day. "I think we should, potentially, be more ambitious," Mr Cook said. But he said any shift would still be done on the basis of medical advice, and local medical services being equipped to target and deal with any further outbreak. "Every time we ease a restriction, we increase the risk, so we have to do these things very carefully," Mr Cook said. "But, we do understand there has been a lot of pain in the community." He said some form of restrictions would have to remain in place, due to the Kimberley's vulnerable population, and remote communities would be consulted on how that would look. The prospect of an end to restrictions cannot come soon enough, with a June resumption in tourism allowing a disastrous season to be at least partially salvaged. A survey of local tourism operators released by Australia's North West Tourism this week indicated 26 per cent of respondents were anticipating, or had already recorded, losses of more than $300,000. But chief executive Natasha Mahar said the survey showed persistent interest in bookings for July onwards this year, right into 2021. "They're all wanting to come here and we need to try and let them come here," Ms Mahar said. "We can find a middle ground and make sure we look after our tourism operators and vulnerable communities at the same time." 
When news of the coronavirus shutdowns began to break, Joan* says she felt sick. "He was going to be here 24/7, it was a nightmare," she told the ABC. Joan had been in an abusive relationship but felt she could access help when she needed. "He would go to work and there was time for myself," she said.  But the lockdown meant those moments of privacy were gone. She had been planning on leaving her partner. Now, that felt impossible.  "It is like being stuck, in the worst way possible. I felt hopeless. And then the beatings started," she said. Joan, whose name has been changed to protect her identity, ended up seeking help through an online chat function late one night. "Hopping on the phone and calling wasn't an option," she said.  In living rooms, hallways, bedrooms and kitchens across Australia, people have been increasingly using an online chat tool to seek help amid the COVID-19 lockdown. The national sexual assault, domestic and family violence counselling service 1800 RESPECT said between March and April, the use of its online chat tool had increased by 38 per cent. The organisation said the increase represented close to 1,000 people, with more than 4,000 people overall seeking help through its webchats in March and April. With attempts to rationalise the murder of Hannah Clarke and her children, we risk blaming the monster and not the man, Rowan Baxter, and the society that allowed these murders to unfold. The organisation said for online chats, March and April in 2020 had been the second-busiest two-month period in the organisation's history.  "Between April 2019 and April 2020, we have seen a 20 per cent rise in the use of the tool overall," a spokeswoman from 1800 RESPECT said. The national hotline said it had also seen a spike in phone calls, but mostly after midnight while partners were asleep.  "Counsellors are now taking more calls from people who at the time of contact are in the same house as someone who uses violence," the spokeswoman said. "More people are calling the service late at night, closer to midnight. This may be when the person using violence is asleep or the conversation cannot be overheard." People were getting in contact for three primary reasons: experiencing violence while in isolation, being more fearful due to being in isolation with a violent partner, and concerns that escape was no longer an option. The spokeswoman said callers would often arrange for a special code word to be used if the caller felt they were at very high risk and needed police called to their home. Susan Crane runs Dawn House, a frontline domestic violence shelter in Darwin.  Unlike the national hotline, she said calls "dropped off a cliff" when the lockdown began. "There are many deaths where unfortunately we don't come across the names of the individual," says a researcher into violence against women. "It was absolutely eerie, we were expecting to be run off our feet," she said. "Usually the phone rings off the hook, then we were getting one or two calls a day, sometimes none. "It's really disturbing; it isn't as if domestic violence has stopped overnight in the NT." According to the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, it is estimated that in Australia 2.2 million adults have experienced physical or sexual violence by a current or previous partner since the age of 15. "What we were hearing during the lockdown was abusive partners controlling women 24 hours a day, including their phone calls," Ms Crane said.  In the meantime, Joan is worried about others still in need of help. "We can't be forgotten at this tough time," she said. "I feel for all of those women who haven't been able to get help yet, I feel like one of the lucky ones." *not her real name. 
Two of the doctors advising the Australian Government on its coronavirus response have said they cannot see the medical reasons for some states keeping their borders closed. Yet these very states and territories  the Northern Territory, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania and Western Australia  insist they are staying shut because of medical advice. Why are there such different opinions? Australia has some of the strongest coronavirus border controls in the world, which are credited as a key reason for our success in suppressing the spread of the virus. The Australian Government closed its international borders to non-citizens and non-residents on March 20, on the advice of its medical expert committee. This body  officially called the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC)  includes all the state chief health officers and is chaired by Australia's chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy. "We knew that the greatest risk to uncontrolled transmission was in imported cases," Professor Murphy told a Senate inquiry last month. "As an island, we were in a position of perhaps doing border measures more effectively than other countries, so the unanimous health advice of the Health Protection Principal Committee was that we should do that." While the AHPPC has advised the Government on issues ranging from elective surgery to when elite sport should be resumed, it has not made any recommendations around state borders. It left this to the states, which acted quickly after Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced he was shutting Australian borders. Tasmania was the first state to close its borders, on March 20, followed by the Northern Territory, South Australia and Western Australia on March 24 and Queensland, the day after. The ACT, NSW and Victoria chose not to. Deputy chief medical officer Paul Kelly said the committee had decided "not to have a decision on [state] borders". "As has been the case with much of the national advice, specific issues related to states are to be done at that state level," he said earlier this week. New South Wales, with its tourism-dependent economy, has been calling for the opening of all state borders to help stimulate struggling local businesses. But the closed-off states  particularly Queensland and WA  have strongly resisted, saying they will open up when their medical advisors say it is safe to do so. Confusingly, two of the Australian Government's top medical advisors have indicated that they do not think it is a problem, medically speaking, for state borders to be open. "From a medical point of view, I can't see why the borders are still closed but, as I said, that's for the states and territories themselves to decide when that time is right for them," Professor Kelly said. His words were echoed by fellow deputy medical officer Nick Coatsworth. "I think it is not clear what medical reasoning [there] is for state borders to remain closed, but that of course is a matter for state premiers," he said. "I think the premiers of Queensland and Western Australia have made it very clear in the media that it is going to be their decision." Yesterday, Professor Kelly further explained why he did not think it was particularly risky to allow interstate travel. "With so few cases in the community  less than 600 active cases, with many people who have come from overseas and are currently in quarantine  the risk of opening borders or plane travel is very low," he told SevenWest Media. The closed states clearly believe they have made the right public health decision, with the statistics backing them up. The NT and SA are in the elite club of states with no confirmed cases of COVID-19, as is the ACT. Only NSW and Victoria recorded new cases of coronavirus on Friday, with both States experiencing community transmission. After intense media attention on the border issue this week, WA's Chief Health Officer, Andrew Robertson, took the step of releasing a statement to explain his advice. He argued that WA's decision to shut interstate and regional borders, as well as enforce a quarantine for interstate arrivals, was "highly effective in reducing interstate cases and eliminating community spread". "COVID-19 cases fell from 35 cases reported on 24 March 2020 to 14 cases by 09 April 2020. Since 29 April, there have only been 3 new cases, all directly related to travellers." His Queensland counterpart, Jeannette Young, shared similar statistics with RN Breakfast on Friday, saying there had been no new cases acquired from interstate in the past 40 days. Both Dr Robertson and Dr Young said it would not be safe to re-open borders until community transmission was eliminated in NSW and Victoria. "It's local transmission where you do not know where that has come from. That's the concern," Dr Young said. They both said their condition for reopening is for these states to record 28 days  or two virus incubation periods of 14 days  without community transmission. "Until community spread is eliminated in the affected jurisdictions, which will require at least a month to confirm, opening of the interstate borders is not recommended," Dr Robertson said in his statement. "If the community spread is controlled, relaxation of the interstate borders could be considered after the introduction and assessment of the impact of phase four [interstate border closure]." The closed states also appeared wary of re-opening the borders too soon and then facing the prospect of reintroducing shutdowns if there was a fresh wave of infections. Even as her state marked the significant achievement of having no active cases of coronavirus, South Australia's Chief Public Health Officer, Nicola Spurrier, refused to use the label "coronavirus-free". "This is obviously a really fantastic milestone for us   [but] it's no time to be complacent," she said. "We do not want a second wave. If we did have a second wave, the only way people know how to deal with that is to shut things down." 
Football without crowds, stadiums without concerts and festivals on the chopping block  COVID-19 has ushered in an uncertain new era for major public events. As restrictions ease and we make our way back to pubs, restaurants and public spaces, there are still many factors at play before we get back to our regular calendar of big events. One of the biggest hurdles to getting back in a crowd could be psychological. With constant reinforcement about physical distancing and staying in your 'bubble', have you found yourself briefly taken aback seeing people in crowds or close together in old photos or in TV shows? University of Queensland social psychology Professor Jolanda Jetten has experienced this and said it was an example of how rapidly we have accepted a new world of restrictions. "It tells you how quickly we've adapted our behaviours, how quickly we've seen closeness to others as something that's dangerous," she said. Professor Jetten said it would take some adjustment for people to return to big events. "The whole idea now of avoiding a crowd has almost become second nature," she said. "We've developed the habits of distancing and to overcome that habit, we're only willing to do that if we know it's 100 per cent safe." At the same time, Professor Jetten said she thought people had missed the feeling of belonging  and the sense of shared experience  that being in a crowd could foster. "I think people have been grieving to go back to normal, to go back to not just meetings with 10 other people, but also to be part of crowds and thousands of people that gather," she said. "We really are social animals, we love to be in a crowd, we love to be immersed  I really wonder how that will play out in the next couple of months." The logistics of planning an event long in advance are complex  and that's before you throw in the added uncertainty of what COVID-19 restrictions could look like. Hobart's Dark Mofo festival pulled the pin early on its 2020 event, saying a last-minute cancellation would have caused even more financial devastation. Perth's annual Australia Day Skyworks celebration, which draws hundreds of thousands of people on January 26 to the banks of the Swan River, was the subject of fierce debate earlier this week after the City of Perth announced it would consider not going ahead with the event, eight months out from the big day. Chair commissioner Andrew Hammond told ABC Radio Perth the commissioners had requested further reports on the event, which would be considered next month. "We simply don't know what the social distancing requirements are going to be at that time and I guess everybody can understand, if you've got 300,000 people sitting around the Swan River watching a fireworks show, there's going to be issues if there's social distancing requirements in place," he said. "If we let things go on as they are, we'll spend over $2 million for an event that might or might not go ahead." Kirsten Holmes, Curtin University's dean of research for the faculty of business and law, said the lead-in time for an event such as Skyworks was crucial. "The idea that we might not be able to get together in a big crowd come January is hard to envisage at the moment, because it seems like we've really got on top of the COVID situation," she said. "I can see why people are saying 'why on earth are they talking about cancelling it now, when it's so far out?' But they will be planning it  a decision has to be made." As AFL and NRL prepare players to get back on the field, University of Western Australia faculty of health and medical sciences executive dean Jon Watson said he was hopeful fans would be able to join them at stadiums later this year, provided there remained little to no community transmission of COVID-19. "Once we know there's no community transmission, the chance of someone going to an event that has the virus becomes very small," he said. "We know from the data on the virus that there's less risk from outdoor events than indoor events, so I think that something that happens in a big outdoor stadium would be more likely to go ahead than, for example, basketball indoors. "But we still need to think about physical distancing, we need to think about hygiene, there needs to be a robust cleaning schedule in place." Professor Watson said events without allocated seating  gatherings of crowds at festivals, or even golf, where spectators could walk around following competitors  would likely face a longer wait. "If someone's positive [for COVID-19], that's a different situation to someone going to a football game or a rugby game," he said. "I think [less controlled events] will probably be more difficult to police on a short-term basis. "In Australia we're going really well, but I think those more controlled events will come first." Australia's Chief Medical Officer, Brendan Murphy, has previously said distancing measures would likely stay in place until a vaccine could be found. With a vaccine still estimated to be a year away at best, some big gatherings look to be off the table in their usual form.  Major upcoming agricultural shows across Australia  including the Royal Melbourne and Adelaide shows, and Ekka in Brisbane  have been axed for 2020, with organisers of Perth's Royal Show cautiously looking on as September draws closer. Royal Agricultural Society of WA president Paul Carter told 6PR Radio a decision was likely from late May to late June. "As each day goes by, running the Royal Show in its traditional timeslot becomes less likely, even though we continue holding out slim hope," Mr Carter said. ABC health editor Norman Swan told triple j a return to music festivals should not be expected anytime soon, with Splendour in the Grass postponed from July to October. However, organisers are hopeful the Falls Festival will run as planned later in 2020. Professor Jetten said dense crowds brought the added problem of people underestimating risk. "At festivals, people engage in unsafe behaviours  sharing cups, unsafe sex behaviours, all sorts of things  because they see others as safe, 'we're all together, all good'," she said. "That's precisely what you should be concerned about with coronavirus." The experts agree a return to major events will look very different to anything we have seen before. Overseas, sporting codes that have emerged from behind closed doors have spaced out people in seats to ensure physical distancing. Professor Watson said he thought there would be changes in terms of queueing to get into big events, possible temperature screening and a need for stepped-up emergency care  along with spaced seating and asking people not to change seats to enable contact tracing. "We already have plans with medical services at major events, but I think there'll be an extra layer to that in terms of how we manage anyone if they suddenly become unwell and how they're taken from the event to a place of isolation in a hospital," he said. Beyond hygiene and health precautions, Professor Holmes said she could also see some environmental benefits on the way. "There's already a move within the sector towards not producing paper copies of anything  maybe doing away with wristbands, anything where people could be touching," she said. 
Thousands of animals are saved from regional pounds every year but that rescue work has been hindered by the coronavirus pandemic. Carey Edwards from the Australian Working Dog Rescue Initiative said the organisation's revenue has dropped by more than half. "There has been a huge impact on donations, of course, because everyone needs their money to survive," he said. Annual events where the organisation raised funds and awareness have all been scrapped. "We would have been out there demonstrating and showing everyone what our fantastic rescue dogs can do," Mr Edwards said. "That's all gone, as is all the royal shows we do  they're all cancelled," he said. The biggest problem has been getting to country pounds to save animals.  Codirector of the organisation, Di Edwards, said regular commercial transport options have been very limited. "So we've had to get volunteers to drive their own vehicles up to these pounds, which are thousands of kilometres away from anywhere central," she said. Ms Edwards worried that more dogs were being put down than might normally be saved. "We suspect more dogs are being killed in council pounds because of the impact that these restrictions are having on the operations of rescue organisations," she said.  However, there have been other rescue groups still managing to do regional pound runs. "We have contracts with various rural pounds throughout Victoria and New South Wales and we have transport runs that go up there regularly," Ms Edwards said.  Shortages of volunteers, along with social distancing restrictions, have made everything harder. "It is very difficult when you have animals involved and you've got to pass animals to other people," Ms Edwards said.  Shelters that normally allowed people to drop-in and see animals now required visitors to make appointments. At the same time, interest in adopting animals has been greater than ever because of the number of people working from home during the pandemic. "The phone just isn't stopping, we've never quite experienced it like this before," Ms Edwards said. "Once a puppy goes up on our social media page, within 15 minutes we're getting 100-plus phone calls." That has meant getting in first to adopt a pet has been harder than normal. And Pets Haven vet nurse, Jordan Ellard, said some people's frustrations have been spilling over. "I have had people abuse me and be rude just because they have tried to call several times" she said. "I do try to explain to them that I'm really busy I'm getting a lot of calls at the same time." The RSPCA has been experiencing the same challenges as other animal rescue organisations. But head of operations at RSPCA Victoria, Tegan McPherson, said the increase in demand to adopt pets has been welcome. "We're adopting more animals than we normally do at this time of year," she said.  "Animals that might have waited a bit longer to find the right home seem to be finding homes a lot more quickly." Ms McPherson's advice to people who were keen to adopt a companion animal was to be patient and be careful. "It's really important to do your homework and make sure the animal welfare organisation or rescue group is reputable," she said.  "Make sure that those animals have been health checked, come vaccinated, microchipped [and] desexed."  The last dog to be adopted from the Australian Working Dog Rescue Initiative was Harry, a fox-terrier-kelpie cross. His adoption was a foster fail, which occurred when a foster carer could not part with an animal when it came time for adoption. Only in this case it was Ms Edwards who could not bear to say goodbye to Harry. "Oh he just made us laugh," she said. "He's just so funny, so full of vim and vigour. He just does the funniest things." Harry was now one of a gang of seven dogs that Mr and Ms Edwards have not been able to part with over the years. All of which are now trained in herding and agility, and have been spending their lives showing the world just what abandoned working dogs could be capable of if given some love and a second chance. 
Paul Keating once famously said: "If you don't live in Sydney, you're just camping out." Sydneysiders cheered while noses across the rest of the country were put firmly out of joint. It's one episode in a longstanding rivalry between Australia's states that flared again this week as various premiers traded blows over coronavirus border restrictions. WA Premier Mark McGowan fired the first salvo, evoking the Ruby Princess debacle in response to NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian's calls for Western Australia, Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania to open up their borders. "And they are trying to give us advice on our borders, seriously?" he quipped. It followed another jibe from Mr McGowan last month when he responded to questions about a NSW man fined $1,000 for contravening social-distancing restrictions by eating a kebab. "I find it hard to believe someone was going for a run and then stopped to have a kebab," he said between chuckles. "In any event, they do things differently in NSW." Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk also stuck in the boot, telling NSW it was "not going to be lectured to" by a state with the highest number of coronavirus cases.  Social commentator Jane Caro says the coronavirus pandemic has strengthened existing state rivalries, particularly against NSW. "NSW seems to always be the state that everybody hates in the same way that Manly Warringah is the football team everybody hates as well," she says. But she says the animosity is not without reason. "I think it's fair to say if the Ruby Princess wasn't allowed to disgorge everyone on Sydney Harbour and go off to the four corners of Australia we'd have had hardly any cases, so maybe NSW has a little bit of ground to make up," she says. Acrimony between the states is nothing new. It's seen each year as various sporting codes take the field, as states vie for the tourism dollars and the prestige that comes with hosting international events.  And it's a rivalry as old as Federation itself, when long-standing competition between Sydney and Melbourne resulted in the country's two largest cities vying to become home to the nation's capital. The Constitution had the final say: Parliament would be located within NSW but not within 160 kilometres of Sydney. Until it was built, Australian Parliament would meet in Melbourne. Greig Pickhaver, one half of comedy duo Roy and HG, says coronavirus has "broken Australian society down into states in a way that I never thought would happen again". "I'd love the State of Origin series to be on now because never before in say the last decade and a half has the animosity between NSW and QLD been wound up so far  it would be a magnificent spectacle for rugby league fans," he says. "Who knows? The Sheffield Shield may become the best cricket competition in the world at this rate!" Caro likens the rivalry to "a bit like siblings in a family" and says it's mostly light-hearted. "They might really love you but if they get an advantage over you they're sure as hell going to leverage it as much as possible and tease you about it unendingly. "I totally accept that there's probably a little bit of delight in being able to say to NSW, 'Ooh I don't know if you guys can be trusted,'" she says. "The more infuriating NSW finds that, the more satisfying that probably is for some of the other states." Having lived in three different states across Australia, Miah Tutuki-Crockett knows interstate rivalry when she sees it. "There's always been a bit of a thing between NSW and Queensland," the 25-year-old says, citing rugby league as the main source of tension. Ms Tutuki-Crockett, 25, grew up in Perth and later moved to Noosa on Queensland's Sunshine Coast but says Sydney has captured her heart. "It's a great place  there's always lots of events going on music, the food is amazing here, so I really like Sydney." Asked if any of her interstate friends rib her for moving to NSW, like a true Sydneysider she replies: "No I feel like most of them end up moving here at some point anyway." 
New coronavirus workplace rules for shearers have created a backlog of unshorn sheep and could worsen a shortage of shearers in Tasmania. The new COVID-19 shearing operation protocols require shearers and other workers in shearing sheds to keep at least 1.5 metres away from each other as they work. To achieve this, shearing stands have been removed from sheds reducing the number of shearers working in each shed. "We've got a spare stand in between us, we've got to wait for the roustabouts to get the fleece before we walk in and get another sheep, and just make sure we stay away from each other," said veteran shearer Tony Bryant. Shearing contractor Ray Edwards said the number of other workers in each shed had also shrunk. "We normally have a wool presser and another shed hand, we've only got the one shed hand," he said. Sheds have been upgraded to allow for extra hygiene, and shearers are discouraged from travelling together and sharing rooms. Mr Edwards said following the new rules in sheds  often built at the turn of last century  was challenging but necessary for the health of workers. "I've got people that are older, some have got a bit of a heart condition, some have got a bit of asthma, and I've had a few health issues," he said. "I'm just trying to do the right thing by everyone, because I don't want the industry shut down." With fewer shearers working in each shed, fewer sheep can be shorn each day and shearing flocks takes longer. Mr Edwards said that had created a backlog of unshorn sheep as his crews and others spent longer at each property. "Instead of having a job cut out, I've got to wait, so the other farmers got to wait  it's just a snowball effect," he said. When Bothwell wool grower Will Bignell recently had 4,000 lambs shorn, only three shearers worked in the shed instead of the usual four. "It's 25 per cent less sheep, which adds up, it slows our whole system up. We lose efficiencies as well, that's the other thing," he said. Mr Bignell was unsure whether shearers would finish at other properties in time to shear his ewes before they gave birth to lambs in spring. "We'll have to basically look at lambing in wool which is not ideal and not the best animal health outcomes that we can achieve," he said. There was already a shortage of shearers in Tasmania when coronavirus struck. Shearers from the mainland have been deterred from travelling to Tasmania by the mandatory quarantine periods when they enter the state and, in some cases, when they return to the mainland. "If they come over from the mainland they've got to isolate here for 14 days, then when they go back they've got to isolate for 14 days," Mr Edwards said.  "They're going to lose 28 days, Just say they earned $300 a day and work that out. It's a lot of money." He fears the shortage will worsen as the season continues. The coronavirus work rules have also reduced training opportunities for new and aspiring shearers. A novice shearer and wool handler school is held every July at the historic Malahide property in Tasmania's Fingal Valley. Australian Wool Innovation trainer Matthew Haney said while the school usually catered for 20 students, this year the intake had been halved. "The 10 rooms that normally would be shared by two people will only be able to accommodate one student," he said. "Also in the shearing shed the 1.5-metre rule must be adhered to as much as practical, which would be impossible with a large group." The market price for wool has dropped as factories in China and other countries closed and retail customers stopped buying new clothes. Some wool growers are stockpiling fleeces until prices rise again while others are still selling at the reduced price. The coronavirus work restrictions also coincided with the breaking of a years' long drought in key sheep farming. Will Bignell had been forced to hand-feed his flock for two years as little rain fell. "It's taking its toll, your normal coping mechanisms are kind of gone," he said. "I think it's a good thing it rained. If it had been dry and we'd gone into this, it would have been soul-destroying." But he said the industry would overcome the new challenge. "That's typical of agriculture, we're a resilient bunch, we take a knock and we get back up and keep going," he said. 
Elvis has not left the building  that's the message from film industry insiders who say the team behind Baz Luhrmann's biopic is "very committed" to restart filming in Queensland post coronavirus. Production of the film at Village Roadshow Studios on the Gold Coast was among the first casualties of the industry in Australia after Tom Hanks, who plays Elvis's manager Colonel Tom Parker, tested positive in March. Screen Queensland chief executive Kylie Munnich has been in contact with the film's production team and told the ABC as soon as restrictions have been lifted they planned to pick up where they left off.  "I know that they just closed the doors on stages and have stored the sets because they are absolutely committed to restart that film," she said. "They had done so much work in pre-production. "It's definitely their intention to get back into production here and they loved being in Queensland  they told me that many times. "I know they want to get back here and get started." Actor Michael Balk from the Actors and Entertainers Benevolent Fund Queensland said the impact of COVID-19 had left thousands of people in the film and television industry out of work. "Like Elvis in Queensland  there are around 1,500 people who are employed in a production like that," he said. "Obviously it effects everyone from the performers in front of the camera through to the crew, through to the people who are supplying to a film like that." Ms Munnich said two other major productions in Queensland  Harrow and Jonathan M. Shiff's Bureau of Magical Things  had also stopped work, as had several other smaller-scale productions.  "Just those three productions alone employed hundreds and hundreds of people," she said.  "There would be projects that were also getting ready to go into production where they've had to halt, so it's had a profound impact." The Media Entertainment and Arts Alliance (MEAA) said an estimated 4,500 film technicians, creators and performers remained out of work.  Michelle Rae from the MEAA said many had been looking for work in other industries while still paying off gear and equipment. She said she was worried the industry was at risk of losing decades of experience as people moved into other jobs out of necessity. "It is day by day for them. There are lots of conversations with banks and debt holders about being able to push that back," she said. Mr Balk said he shared those same concerns. "We're looking at a potential skills loss, where people that have been working for decades, if not longer, will suddenly be forced to change career," he said. Even though restrictions are easing, Mr Balk said the industry would still have challenges with social distancing. "Sound operators can't get close to the talent, performers can't have intimate scenes without breaking that 1.5-metre barrier," he said. Ms Munnich said some in the industry had been finding ways to produce work on a smaller scale. "Whether it's television commercials, film or TV [or] our games industry which is very robust in Queensland, you'll find people trying to come out from under this," she said.  Not all workers are eligible for government grants, given the nature of their role and the industry. Screen Queensland has launched several initiatives, including a $3.3 million support package aimed at allowing productions to keep working behind the scenes to prepare for the moment the "green light is given". "You can imagine that there will be a bottleneck ... in Queensland, Australia and internationally," Ms Munnich said.  "There'll be this real surge in production needing to happen." 
NSW coronavirus social-distancing restrictions for restaurants will soon be the most relaxed in the country  bar the Northern Territory. But things will look very different inside pubs and eateries when hospitality venues in Australias worst-affected coronavirus state are allowed to open their doors to up to 50 people from June 1. Venues have been warned that people must stay 4-square metres from each other, and cannot stand, mingle or dance. There will also be no buffets or shared cutlery and bookings will be limited to 10 people. Diners will have to register their name and phone number when they enter the so they can be contacted in the event of an outbreak. The latest round of easing restrictions will come as a relief to many restaurateurs who have struggled to operate amid the 10-person limit. Aref Jaroud, the restaurateur behind a Facebook post which slammed a diner for cancelling without notice, said the industry was in a "world of pain". Mr Jaroud owns and operates Low 302 in Sydney's Surry Hills, and said when the mystery four-person booking, under the name Aimee, didn't show up, he vented. The post, told mystery diner Aimee there was "a special place in hell" for her for costing the restaurant 40 per cent of its capacity last Saturday evening. But now, Mr Jaroud realises "there could be many reasons why someone is a no-show". The viral post said Low 302 was now requiring deposits upon booking confirmations, but Mr Jaroud said he had changed his mind. As more patrons fill restaurants, bars and cafes from June 1, Mr Jaroud says "there is a health and safety concern that I think takes precedence". "I would worry that if someone for instance got the sniffles, they may decide to still go out so as not to lose their deposit. "I'm not putting a booking fee above the possibility of that scenario." He said he understands the frustration of the hospitality industry, but he said charging a booking fee was not the answer. "I'm one of them, but just now, more than ever, we need to place health and safety first," he said. "We may need to take a few no shows on the chin, and try to be patient." Mr Jaroud said he was contacted by dozens of restaurant owners, sharing their own tales of no-show bookings. "I cannot believe every one of them was due to an emergency, or a situation where someone in the group couldn't have picked up the phone, or emailed in a cancellation," he said. Mel Gatfield from United Workers Union NSW said regulations should urgently be put in place to protect workers and customers from coronavirus as the 50-person limit rolls out. "COVID-19 has devastated the hospitality workforce," she said.  "Now, as restrictions are loosened this workforce is apprehensive, members are very concerned about returning to work in confined spaces."  Mr Gatfield said the hospitality industry as a whole had an "appalling track record when it came to looking after workers".  "Hospitality workers must be able to go back to work in hospitality venues from 1 June knowing that strict measures are in place to ensure everyone's safety," she said. 
Crouched in the back of the cab I have a choice: open the ABC News app and immediately inform myself of all the news I will need to know and broadcast that day or  in that gloom before dawn, and in those few moments I have to myself before the serious business of the day overwhelms me  do I open the Twitter account "Am I the Asshole"? This lockdown has revealed to us, and to those living with us, sometimes confronting truths about our deeper natures. People who had no intention of being so closely quartered have been thrown together by necessity and have spent more time, more intensely, with each other than maybe they ever have before. It's one way to cement a relationship. It's also one sure-fire way to burn the whole damn thing to the ground. This addictive, astonishing and sometimes quite unbelievable account (and there are many who think quite a deal of it is just made up) allows people to post to Reddit a personal dilemma about their behaviour which can then be discussed and voted on. The Twitter account @AITA curates some of the most intriguing. It turns out COVID-19 hasbroughtabout a global, real-time laboratory-condition series of psychologicalexperimentsthat are now being written up  not by Harvard professors, but byfreaked-out or deeplyguiltypartners in an all-access online forum. Journalism may be the first draft of history, but these posts are most certainly the key documents of a major sociological phenomenon. Some of the dilemmas are staggering. AITA for permanently deleting my girlfriend's Instagram account? For storming out of a dinner because they put potatoes in the chilli? For being mad that my boyfriend dedicated his book to OJ instead of me? For asking that my neighbour not bring her screaming baby outside? And in one of the greatest examples of narcissistic personality disorder you'll ever read, for taking my girlfriend's secret poetry that she doesn't want read and publishing it as a song? So many of the problems arise from two people suddenly living together. They bring their stuff  dolls, oversize soft toys, poetry, a total lack of maturity or empathy  and dump it all into the middle of a relationship that's just not ready for it. Or ready for anything at all. There are the man-babies, and the mean women and the selfish fathers, and punishing mothers. And while some of the posts are genuinely distressing cries from the heart  the wife who just wants her husband to get off the video games and look after their six-month-old  others are the primary material for what should become a modern treatise about a generation of people raised to be breathtakingly selfish. Yes, a lot of it is hilarious, but a great deal is also a fascinating insight into the biggest challenge that we all find ourselves in: where do my needs come right now? First or behind someone else's? Am I capable of re-ordering them? Check it out. Be as judgy as you like  that's what's it about  but then take a moment and ask yourself: are you one of them? Subscribe to join Virginia Trioli each Saturday morning for the best long reads, analysis and features from the ABC. This weekend we have evidence that some of us are trying very hard not to be that a-hole. Jack Gow is using COVID19 to getunapologetically closer to his male friendsand change the dynamic of his friendships for the better. My colleague Madeleine Morris is trying to do her bit toreduce her family's carbon footprint by cutting out meat(but you try telling that to a bunch of tofu-refusing kids). And we haveblack cockatoosfor you: the greatest bird in the Australian skies. No correspondence will be entered into on this. Thank you. Have a safe and happy weekend, whether by twos or 10s or 20s  and here's your weekly reminder THAT IT'S NOT OVER YET. Dear God, please keep your distance. Our over-talented but underemployed performers are doing what they do best for you this weekend  getting on with it, and the enduring treasure that is Belvoir has gathered cast from around the world to perform songs from many of their shows, sung by original cast members forBelvoir in Concert. If you tune in to watch, please donate just as you'd so love to buy a ticket and be there with them One of my secret loves, Virginia Gay  the woman who breathed life back into Calamity Jane in her show-stopping Australian performances  will be hosting this fabulous event. So wrap your arms around someone you love, tell them your heart's secret, andslow danceto this tonight. Virginia Trioli is presenter on Mornings onABC RadioMelbourne and the former co-host ofABCNews Breakfast. This article contains content that is not yet available here. 
The United Nations says the coronavirus crisis is moving the world towards increased technological innovation and online collaboration, increasing our vulnerability to cyberattacks  and it is estimated one such attack happens every 39 seconds. Look back on Saturday as it unfolded. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery Gladys Berejiklian may have told people to start booking their holidays a few days back, but we're still a way off from travel restrictions being lifted on June 1. For the time being, recreational intra-state travel is off limits. Deputy Premier John Barilaro said while regional NSW will welcome visitors with open arms when the time for travel does come, holidaymakers should call their planned accommodation venues and attractions to ensure they will be open and confirm their bookings before travelling. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery There's a headline I never thought I'd write. But here we are. Rent prices in Sydney have dipped to unprecedented levels and vacancies have soared amid the coronavirus pandemic. Inner Sydney currently has a 13.8 per cent rental vacancy rate, compared with 6.5 per cent last year, the latest data from SQM Research shows. Weekly rental prices in the CBD have also fallen by more than $100-a-week, compared with the same time last year. Here's the full story. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery Hi Brett, The Federal Government made a decision to ban Australians from travelling overseas on March 26 and there areno plans to lift that rule until at least the end of the year. There are exemptions to it, however, and the information on that can be foundhere. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery University of the Sunshine Coast nursing program leader Matt Mason says the biggest difference between those countries and Australia is the level of risk. "The main difference is that we simply don't have the same burden of disease that America or the UK or some of the other countries have," he says. "The risk of catching the disease is much, much lower here because we simply don't have it circulating to the same extent that America has." By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery 
Crushingly crowded public transport. The world's oldest population. A huge outbreak on a cruise ship. A state of emergency without penalties.  It sounded like a recipe for a coronavirus catastrophe, and there were fears among public health experts that Japan could become the next Italy or New York.  But it hasn't happened. The country hasn't exactly escaped unscathed. About 800 people have died and more than 16,000 have been infected in a country of 126 million. But in comparison, more than 90,000 Americans have died from COVID-19.  And Germany, which is widely hailed for its coronavirus containment strategy, has suffered about 8,000 deaths in a country of 83 million people. The World Health Organization (WHO) sees Japan as a "success story" according to WHO senior adviser Nikki Shindo. "People are saying it's a Japanese miracle ... [they're saying], 'I don't really understand', because Japan received more than 400,000 tourists from China during Chinese New Year," Dr Shindo told the ABC. "Japan had cases much earlier than anybody else, but it kept the case count really low, considering its population density and movement of people." Japan was repeatedly criticised over a lack of testing, which some health experts said would hide the true picture of the virus' spread in the country.  But still, the number of deaths has not exploded, the state of emergency has been lifted in most of the nation and the Government says the country is on the path to containment. Pinpointing exactly why Japan has been able to keep deaths comparatively low has been a puzzle, according to Japan's Nobel laureate Tasuku Honjo. "We may expect another wave," the immunologist warned.  "But so far this is still a mystery to most of the medical scientists: why Japan, with such a relatively legally loose [state of emergency] system has quite remarkably [fewer] deaths and infections."  Professor Honjo said it would take some time to work out conclusively what was happening, but there are a range of theories currently being examined.  "People in this country are generally very clean. They like to be clean, they wash hands very frequently on normal days and they don't kiss, they don't hug," he said.  "There's also [a] hypothesis that the BCG vaccination will help with boosting up the basic level of immunity." The BCG is a tuberculosis vaccination which is not widely used in Australia, the US or UK. But it's still given to children in Japan. There is Australian-led research looking into the BCG vaccine as a possible protection against COVID-19, but research leader Professor Nigel Curtis said it would take "many months" before they would have any results. Kazuho Taguchi from Japan's Health Ministry said he couldn't "conclusively pinpoint" a reason for Japan's success, but the nation's strong health system and the fact many Japanese people wear masks may have helped.  "Japan has universal health coverage ... and we are proud of this healthcare system that is not behind any other nation," he said. Once the virus began to spread in big cities the Government was forced to declare a state of emergency on April 7.  But Japan's "lockdown lite" was nothing like the strict measures seen in other countries, and largely depended on people volunteering to stay home.  Restaurants were allowed to stay open for certain hours, and some businesses said they had no other choice but to keep trading because they felt the Government compensation on offer was inadequate The lockdown has since been lifted in 42 of 47 regions, and infections continue to fall in the capital, it could end in the greater Tokyo area as early as May 25.  One of the major differences between Japan and many other high-income nations is its philosophy on testing.  Rather than offer a COVID-19 test to everyone who wants one, Japan's regime has been far more "strategic" to prevent the overloading of hospitals, according to the WHO's Nikki Shindo. As of a few weeks ago, Japan was only doing about two tests for COVID-19 for every 1,000 people. Australia, by comparison, is doing more than 40 tests per 1,000 people. Kazuho Taguchi from Japan's Health Ministry said tests were performed this way so that people wouldn't flood testing centres, potentially triggering another wave of infection. Anyone who tested positive was swiftly isolated in hospital. But it has not all been deliberate. An initial lack of testing capacity and an overwhelming shortage of personal protective equipment for sample collectors and lab technicians also slowed the rate of tests.  But Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's expert advisers said that even as the number of tests increased, the number of positive cases continued to decline.  Despite criticism of Japan's comparatively low test rate, Dr Shindo said strategic testing was key to prevent the system from being overwhelmed. "Only one in five people are transmitting the [virus]. So you were just wasting the test to detect 80 per cent of the people who don't really create the second generation of infection," she said.  Dr Shindo believes criticism of the low testing rate is unfair.  "What Japan did was really fantastic, because if you test everyone, for what? It's not influenza. You don't have the disease-specific antiviral," Dr Shindo said.   Japan has since relaxed its guidelines for testing, and local governments have also been transferring people with mild symptoms to hotels, freeing up hospital capacity. Dr Shindo backs that strategy because it helps ensure positive cases don't travel to hospital unless absolutely necessary. "That movement will put other [parts of the] population at risk because those people will take a taxi [or] public transportation. They move," she said.  "I think it's wise not to do too many tests and really focus on the cluster detection and management of severe patients." But Professor Kenji Shibuya from the Institute for Population Health at King's College London remains concerned. With the country at times struggling to contain the virus over the last few months, he says they need to scale up capacity to prepare for a possible resurgence of cases. "Even if this wave is managed with some luck, Japan should not consider that it is a success. [It] needs to put the system in place ... to prepare for a resurgence, which will inevitably happen," he said. It's fair to say not all has been perfect in Japan.  There was the sudden and unprecedented crisis of the Diamond Princess cruise ship that was thrust upon Japan in February, and left 712 passengers and crew infected. Governments around the world  including Australia  organised charter flights to get their citizens off the ship docked at the port of Yokohama because of concerns about the quarantine. When passengers were let off the ship, it was initially feared that the virus would spread widely in Japan, but that didn't happen. And despite Japan's world class medical system, some medical facilities have struggled to cope with an influx of patients A surge of infections within some hospitals in the country forced them to suspend outpatient treatment and cut back on other services. An ambulance carrying a man with a fever and difficulty breathing was rejected by 80 clinics and forced to search for hours for a hospital in downtown Tokyo that would treat him. Some hospitals were refusing suspected coronavirus patients because they were not designated infection hospitals, did not have enough equipment, or feared the infection would spread inside the facility.  Emergency medicine experts said this put extraordinary pressure on critical care centres. But there are signs the hospital system is now stabilising in many parts. The Tokyo Metropolitan Government said as of May 19, there were fewer than 679 positive COVID-19 patients in hospital, and only 42 were in intensive care or on ventilators.  Professor Kenji Shibuya warns that there's no cause for celebration just yet. "Even though Japan did not impose a strict lockdown but a voluntary stay-at-home measure, people did follow it well and kept social distancing at the level of a strict lockdown in other countries," he said.  He also believes Japan got "lucky" that the virus was mostly contained to 13 regions. "We have to be really careful about the decision to lift the declaration [of a state of emergency]," he said. And while current figures show that the overall mortality rate in the capital Tokyo for the first three months of this year fell compared to the same time last year, Professor Shibuya is urging caution.  "There is a time lag between the onset and death, so we have to carefully look at mortality in April and May," the Professor warned.  Signs suggest the initial public health challenge may be under control.  The mission for Japan now is to both prepare for a second wave and start rebuilding the world's third largest economy, which has now entered a technical recession. 
The British Government has announced a mandatory 14-day coronavirus quarantine for all incoming travellers from overseas. The move, which does not come into force until June 8, has angered airlines who fear it will devastate the already frail industry. Under the rules, announced by Home Secretary Priti Patel, all international arrivals  including British citizens  will be required to self-isolate for 14 days and provide details of where they will be staying to the authorities. "Now we are past the peak of this virus, we must take steps to guard against imported cases triggering a resurgence of this deadly disease," Ms Patel said during the Downing Street daily press conference. "We are introducing these new measures now to keep the transmission rate down and prevent a devastating second wave. "Arrivals will be required to travel directly from their port or airport of arrival, preferably by car, to an address where they must then self-isolate for a fortnight." She said those who breached the quarantine in England could be fined 1,000 pounds (A$1,863), and that spot checks would be carried out by health and border officials. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Those whose accommodation does not allow for self-isolation will be set up in facilities provided by the government, but at a cost to the traveller. The quarantine measures will not apply to those arriving from the Republic of Ireland, and there are also exemptions for freight drivers, medical professionals and seasonal agricultural workers. Critics have questioned why the measures have been introduced so late, with Britain only enforcing quarantine on travellers coming from China and northern Italy at the start of the coronavirus pandemic. Airline bosses said the measures would have severe repercussions, with Michael O'Leary, chief executive of low-cost carrier Ryanair, saying they would be "unenforceable and unpoliceable" and would be ignored. "Introducing a quarantine at this stage makes no sense and will mean very limited international aviation at best," Tim Alderslade, chief executive of industry body Airlines UK, said. "It is just about the worst thing [the] government could do if their aim is to restart the economy." The Government said the quarantine measures will be reviewed every three weeks. ABC/wires 
The dispute between the NRL and the referees' union has been resolved, with the whistleblowers agreeing to the league's move to proceed with one referee for the remainder of the season. Under the deal, 22 full-time referees will be employed both this year and next with the one-referee system to be a "trial" that is reviewed at year's end. The referees' association, the Professional Rugby League Match Officials (PRLMO), had been planning to go before an arbitration hearing at the Fair Work Commission after a decision by the Australian Rugby League Commission to return to one on-field referee. But the union has now reached a deal to have a single official for the remainder of the year, and for part-time referees who are not required to retain a $500-a-week payment. The system will be reviewed at the end of the year by representatives of players, coaches, referees and the NRL management. ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys said the six-again rule for ruck penalties would also be introduced. "This is an excellent outcome for the game and all its stakeholders. Can I thank the individual referees for the way they conducted themselves during todays discussion," V'landys said on Friday. "It was heart-warming to see their desire that nothing stands in the way of the 28th May commencement of our great game and they want to be an integral part of its success. "The new rule changes will make our game faster and more entertaining. Most importantly it will address the biggest on-field issues which are speed around the ruck, and the eradication of the wrestle." The deal marked a win-win for the NRL after days of acrimony between the game's executives and the match officials.  The referees' union had infuriated the NRL on Friday by accusing it of overlooking player safety, saying administrators were "arrogant" and were like a "bull in a china shop" in rushing to make changes. "It's simple, today's game is safer with two refs," the PRLMO said in a statement. "On numerous occasions, the second referee has picked up potential causes of harm to players which were not detected at the same time by the other three match officials, nor the bunker. "This includes tackles, holds and throws that can cause significant injury. But this does not appear to concern the league's bosses." The union claimed that 80 per cent of ruck penalties are spotted by the pocket referee, who has been eliminated in the NRL's new model. Mr V'landys insisted that under his plan there would be extra qualified eyes on the ruck, with officials who had previously been pocket referees now acting as touch judges. Both they and the bunker will be given license to communicate with the central referee on the ruck as part of the changes approved by the commission. Mr V'landys said eliminating the pocket referee would save close to $2 million in a full season. ABC/AAP 
It's amazing how a few employers putting 1500 into a form, instead of 1, can change the colour of your day, if you are a government feeling the weight on your shoulders of carrying the wages of 6 million workers at a cost of $130 billion. Those employers putting in how much each worker was expected to get from the Government's JobKeeper scheme, rather than how many of their workers were going to get it, had made the cost and employment fallout of the pandemic look even more terrible than it was. Until Friday that is, when someone noticed the problem and the number of people on the scheme was sliced by 2.5 million and its cost to "just" $70 billion. It's an immense relief of course, though no-one is suggesting it changes the underlying realities of the economic outlook with unemployment still forecast to reach 10 per cent. And it doesn't change the politics. If you were looking for some markers of how COVID-19 may have changed the way politics is conducted in Australia, two of our more fraught issues provided them this week: energy policy and industrial relations. What they seem to show is that pandemic produces a combination of some significant shifts around the edges, some urgent new pressures to actually address long-running sores, and quite a lot of "as you were" rhetoric and non-action. In the case of energy, there has been a flurry of activity, including the release of the King Review (the final report of the expert panel examining additional sources of low-cost abatement), leaked advice from the COVID commission advising the Government on an economic comeback, and the Morrison Government's Technology Investment Roadmap discussion paper "that will bring a strategic and system-wide view to future investments in low emissions technologies".  A pragmatic summing up of all the words involved would be "quite a lot about gas, not a lot about coal". Look, there were the usual hoary old chestnuts that rear their heads every time the Government has another attempt at re-booting the energy (and, dare one say, climate change) discussion: carbon capture and storage, soil carbon sequestration, nuclear power, blah, blah, blah. The Government has even re-discovered the potential joys of electric cars, after the whole unfortunate "Labor will steal your ute" diversion last year. Germany is doing what Australia says it can't  shutting down its coal industry. But what seems most significant is the lack of kowtowing to coal, beyond some talk of upgrading existing coal fired power stations. Some people might see this as either reasonable, or still too much coal. But to those watching the quivering contortions of the Coalition on coal, and all that talk about high efficiency, low emission coal plants just last year, the silence would seem to be deafening. So we have a significant, if relatively quietly made, change in rhetoric on coal, some greater urgency in thinking about affordable power generation for industry  given the sudden focus on the fact we may have to actually, like, make more things  and then quite a lot of what we have heard time and time again. This last bit, unsurprisingly, notes that renewable energy is already the cheapest form of energy and will remain so well into the future, though there needs to be a confidently-based transition fuel in the meantime. As analysts have pointed out, much of the roadmap bears a striking resemblance to a 2017 paper with a very similar name: the Low Emissions Technology Roadmap. The good news for those weary of the energy policy wheels spinning with little traction, but many acronyms, is that the subject is unlikely to get much air space, other than a general mention of gas, when the Prime Minister delivers an address at the National Press Club on Tuesday. Scott Morrison will be talking economic recovery and what will drive it, with a heavy emphasis on industrial relations. There are two aspects to the industrial relations debate at present that prove an interesting test of the COVID politics. The timing of one of them is completely outside the Government's control and goes to the heart of the issue exposed by the pandemic: the casualisation of the labour market. On Thursday, a full bench of the Federal Court made a ruling on the common understanding in law of what constitutes casual employment. Until now, it has been that casuals are those paid an extra 20 to 25 per cent loading in lieu of permanent employee entitlements. But now the Court has defined them by their pattern of work instead, finding that a worker, ostensibly a casual under his contract, but with regular and predictable shifts, is entitled to permanent employee benefits. Casual workers and microbusiness owners forced to isolate or to work less fear what could happen to them or their businesses, with no paid leave available to them. Depending on your perspective, this is a judgement that could either have economically catastrophic consequences, or will hardly affect anyone. It is certainly the case that it applies to a particular set of circumstances involving a labour hire company in the mining industry. And the judgement upholds another one made in a separate case two years involving the same labour hire firm, Workpac. Beyond that, some employers were arguing the retrospective decision could result in employees going back to "double dip" and claim backdated benefits for years of work and that it could apply broadly across sectors like hospitality and retail. Others, including the ACTU, insist that it should be seen clearly as a "loophole that labour hire companies have been exploiting to undermine job security and pay". For now, the Industrial Relations Minister is keeping his powder dry, awaiting indications of whether the case may be appealed in the High Court, but not ruling out legislation to try to clarify the matter. For it does raise inevitable questions about just what does constitute casual work in the broader workforce, at a time when the weak links of so many workers to their place of employees  as casuals  has cut such a conspicuous swathe through the economy and people's lives. The casualisation of the workforce  and insecure work  has been a big issue for the unions for some years but it is one that now has immense bite across the economy. What makes the Government's ultimate response to this issue is that it seems determined to maintain the spirit of cooperation with the unions that has built up through this crisis, a determination which has seen it this week officially put the contentious "ensuring integrity" bill  which would make it easier to deregister unions and union officials  in the freezer. That makes the question of how Morrison presents himself on the industrial relations issue next Tuesday all the more interesting. Both unions and employers have long expressed their dissatisfaction with the enterprise bargaining system set up by the Keating Government. What was once a system designed to help break industrial relations out of centralised wage fixing and allow for flexibility at the individual enterprise level has now itself become ossified. Unions argue it is not fit for purpose in an economy much changed over the past 25 years from large workplaces to small ones where the bargaining power of individual employees is much reduced. Employers argue that layers added to the system  such as the "better off overall test"  have made it unworkable. It's become easier for many to go back to the industrial award system which was supposed to gradually wither in significance and scale over time and so which also has its problems. The Government insists that it wants to step right away from the antagonistic politics of WorkChoices, and step back to allow employers and employees to work out how a new system should work. The Government's role, sources say, is just setting up the process for achieving that. The question therefore will be what mix of significant change, urgent new pressure, and "as you were" will emerge on Tuesday, and how it will drive the political battleground between now and the next election. Laura Tingle is 7.30's chief political correspondent. 
The JobKeeper bungle now means the Federal Government is essentially $60 billion richer, which is good news for the budget's bottom line. Economists say the savings should be used to taper off the payment for businesses who need it An error between the number of employees businesses estimated would be covered by the scheme and the actual amount currently receiving the payment forced the Australian Tax Office and Treasury to revise the total number, and cost, of the scheme down. The departments now say the scheme will cover 3.5 million workers, down from 6.5 million, and cost around $70 billion, down from $130 billion. Danielle Wood from the Grattan Institute said that, unsurprisingly, the difference in the amount will go towards softening the blow on the federal budget when it is handed down in October. "The Government has announced what we thought were around $195 billion in financial measures, $130 billion of which was the JobKeeper package," she said. "So, the $60 billion saving will mean the deficit is probably a bit smaller than we expected it to be." Ms Wood said if the revised number of employees accessing the scheme was an indication the economy was doing better than forecast, that could have other beneficial flow-on effects for the budget. "First of all tax receipts, obviously if we're not in such a big hole as we thought we were, that may mean that income taxes and company taxes are higher than a lot of us were expecting," she said. "It can also potentially mean lower spending on payments although, as we know, the unemployment rate has jumped up and we still have a lot of people on JobSeeker." But she also said it was important to note the difference between the estimated and actual figures could also be because businesses who had registered their interest in JobKeeper had not followed through. Economist and former Treasury official Warren Hogan said the error was significant and the savings were not entirely, as the Treasurer had claimed, "good news". "There isn't a sporting analogy for how big a miss this was," he said. "I'd be a little bit sceptical about painting a positive picture of this, I don't think that's right. "You've got a little bit more money than you thought you had, I don't think that means the economy is much better than you previously thought, although the Treasurer seems to think it is an indicator of that." Professor Hogan, who now works as an Industry Professor at the University of Technology's Business School, said it was "bad news" that the Treasurer had signalled none of the money would be redirected to other spending which would benefit the economy. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Both he and Ms Wood argued some of the unexpected windfall would be best spent on tapering out the JobKeeper program for businesses that were not back on their feet by September, when the scheme is currently due to finish. "They've got the flexibility to change the way the JobKeeper program finishes and that hard stop was always problematic," Professor Hogan said. He said there was going to be a lot of work for Treasury ahead in the fallout of the error, as they dealt with "a lot of moving parts" to adjust the budget and economic forecasts created on the original figures. On who was to blame, Professor Hogan said the error was one for Treasury, the ATO and the Government to learn from but it was "not a matter of blame". "This is all very new and when you rush things, especially at such a big scale, mistakes can be made," he said. "I don't know the mechanics and whether it was a silly error and someone should be held accountable within the ATO or Treasury. "We're in the biggest crisis anyone alive has seen from a society-wide point of view and we can't lay blame." 
The British Government says Prime Minister Boris Johnson's adviser Dominic Cummings did not break coronavirus lockdown guidelines when he took a journey of 400km while he had COVID-19 symptoms, despite calls for him to face the sack. Elsewhere, South Korea has reported 23 fresh cases of coronavirus, mostly from the densely populated Seoul area where authorities shut down thousands of nightclubs, bars and karaoke rooms in a desperate attempt to stem transmissions. This story will be regularly updated throughout Saturday. This story is no longer being updated. For the latest coronavirus news and updates, follow this story. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson is resisting calls to sack his chief adviser, Dominic Cummings, after reports he broke the Government's own lockdown rules by travelling 400km while ill with COVID-19 symptoms. Mr Cummings, who masterminded the 2016 campaign to leave the European Union during the Brexit referendum, travelled to his parents' house in Durham in northern England in late March, when a strict lockdown was already in place. A lockdown that began March 23 stipulated that people should remain at their primary residence, leaving only for essential local errands and exercise, and not visit relatives. Anyone with symptoms was told to completely isolate themselves. Mr Johnson's office said in a statement that Cummings made the trip because his wife was showing coronavirus symptoms, he thought he was likely to also get sick, and relatives had offered to help look after the couple's young son. "Owing to his wife being infected with suspected coronavirus and the high likelihood that he would himself become unwell, it was essential for Dominic Cummings to ensure his young child could be properly cared for," a Downing Street spokesman said. "His actions were in line with coronavirus guidelines. Mr Cummings believes he behaved reasonably and legally."  The spokesperson said Mr Cummings stayed in a house "near to but separate from" his extended family. Dave Penman, the leader of civil servants union the FDA, said "the Prime Minister needs to understand how heartbreaking this lockdown has been for so many families and the sacrifices that have been made up and down the country." He said Mr Johnson must explain why "it looks like there is one rule for those at the centre of government and one rule for rest of the country." South Korea has reported 23 fresh cases of coronavirus, mostly from the densely populated Seoul area where authorities shut down thousands of nightclubs, bars and karaoke rooms in a desperate attempt to stem transmissions. The figures announced by the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention brought national totals to 11,165 cases and 266 deaths.  Thirteen of the new cases came from Gyeonggi province surrounding Seoul, which on Saturday ordered the closure of an additional 2,629 bars and karaoke rooms, bringing the number of shut entertainment venues to 8,363. But theres growing concern over the steady rise of infections in the greater capital area, where about half of South Korea's 51 million people live. More than 200 of the recent infections have been linked to clubgoers in the Seoul metropolitan area.  China recorded no new confirmed COVID-19 cases on the mainland for May 22, the first time it had seen no daily rise in the number of cases since the pandemic began in Wuhan late last year. China's National Health Commission (NHC) said in a statement that there were four new cases on the previous day, including an imported one in Shanghai and locally transmitted case in the north-eastern province of Jilin. China has seen a sharp fall in locally transmitted cases since March as major restrictions on people's movement helped it take control of the epidemic in many parts of the country. But it has continued to see an influx of imported cases, mainly involving Chinese nationals returning from abroad, while new clusters of infections in the north-eastern border provinces of Jilin and Heilongjiang have emerged in recent weeks. Wuhan also reported this month its first cluster of infections since a lockdown on the city ended on April 8, prompting authorities to warn that counter-epidemic measures could not be relaxed and to launch a campaign to test all of Wuhan's 11 million residents for COVID-19. The number of confirmed cases in the mainland stood at 82,971 and the death toll remained unchanged at 4,634.  Former NBA superstar Patrick Ewing is in isolation in hospital after testing positive. Ewing, who spent 13 of his 15 seasons in the NBA with the New York Knicks through the 80s and 90s, now coaches the men's basketball team at Georgetown University in Washington DC. The 57-year-old said he chose to share his diagnosis publicly to emphasise how dangerous the virus was. "This virus is serious and should not be taken lightly," he said. "I want to encourage everyone to stay safe and take care of yourselves and your loved ones. Now more than ever, I want to thank the healthcare workers and everyone on the front lines. I'll be fine and we will all get through this." Ewing won a national championship with Georgetown in his playing days, won two Olympic gold medals, was an NBA All Star 11 times and reached the finals with the Knicks in 1994. He was inducted into the basketball hall of fame in 2008. The WHO has identified South America as the new "epicentre" of the pandemic as the virus accelerates across South America. Brazil reported more than 2,100 deaths in the past two days, bringing its total toll to 21,048, as the number of cases soared above 330,000. The country now has the second-highest number of cases in the world, overtaking Russia and behind only the United States' official count of 1.6 million. The true number  both of cases and deaths  in Brazil is likely higher than the official count, as Latin America's top economy has been slow to ramp up testing. Across South America, infections rose and intensive care units (ICU) were swamped in Peru, Chile and Ecuador, countries lauded for imposing early and aggressive business shutdowns and quarantines. Many experts said the rising death toll across Latin America showed the limits of government action in a region where millions make a living in informal jobs and many police forces are weak or corrupt and unable to enforce restrictions. In Chile, more than 90 per cent of ICU beds were full last week in the capital, Santiago, where the main cemetery dug 1,000 emergency graves to prepare for a wave of deaths. Ecuador's Government declared a 2:00pm to 5:00am curfew in March, among other measures, but cases have swamped medical and mortuary services in the city of Guayaquil and the capital, Quito. Hundreds of people can be seen violating the curfew daily in Ecuadorian cities, many selling goods on the streets to earn enough to buy food. Malaria drug hydroxychloroquine, which US President Donald Trump says he has been taking, was tied to increased risk of death in a study of 96,000 COVID-19 patients, according to a paper published in the widely respected medical journal The Lancet. The study found people treated with hydroxychloroquine, or closely related drug chloroquine, had higher risk of in-hospital death when compared to those who had not been given the drug. Mr Trump has said he is taking hydroxychloroquine to protect against the virus, even though his administration has warned it can have deadly side effects. The head of Italy's pharmacological agency has also weighed in on the lack of data to suggest it is effective against COVID-19 as Italy conducts its own limited trials of the drug.  A Harvard University medical professor involved in the study said the results were clear. "We asked a question: is there any benefit whatsoever in using any one of these regimens in hospitalised patients with COVID-19? And the answer is a fairly conclusive no," Professor Mandeep Mehra said. "Then we asked if there's no evidence of benefit, is there evidence of harm  and that too was surprisingly a yes." Researchers reported a coronavirus vaccine developed by Chinese company CanSino Biologics appears to be safe and induced a rapid immune response in its first human trial. First-in-human studies, known as Phase I trials, are primarily designed to test safety. This vaccine did not cause any serious adverse effects, the researchers said in The Lancet, though they did report some side effects such as fever. Blood samples from the 108 vaccinated adults showed so-called neutralising antibodies and T-cell responses against the novel coronavirus, a sign of possible efficacy. "These results represent an important milestone," co-author Professor Wei Chen from the Beijing Institute of Biotechnology said in a statement. "The ability to trigger these immune responses does not necessarily indicate that the vaccine will protect humans from COVID-19. We are still a long way from this vaccine being available to all." Further studies will be needed to confirm whether the vaccine protects against infection. The first such trial is underway in Wuhan, China. The UN disarmament chief says the COVID-19 pandemic is moving the world toward increased technological innovation and online collaboration, but "cybercrime is also on the rise, with a 600 per cent increase in malicious emails during the current crisis." Izumi Nakamitsu told an informal meeting of the UN Security Council on Friday that "there have also been worrying reports of attacks against health care organisations and medical research facilities worldwide." She said growing digital dependency had increased the vulnerability to cyberattacks, and "it is estimated that one such attack takes place every 39 seconds." Estonia's Prime Minister, Juri Ratas, whose country holds the Security Council presidency and organised Friday's meeting on cyber stability and advancing responsible government behaviour in cyberspace, said: "The COVID-19 crisis has put extra pressure on our critical services in terms of cybersecurity." He said the need for "a secure and functioning cyberspace" is therefore more pressing than ever and he condemned cyberattacks targeting hospitals, medical research facilities and other infrastructure, especially during the pandemic. "Those attacks are unacceptable," Ratas said. "It will be important to hold the offenders responsible for their behaviour." Meanwhile, UN peacekeeping chief Jean-Pierre Lacroix says there have been 75 cases of COVID-19 in the UN's 13 far-flung peacekeeping missions, which have a total of 110,000 troops, police and personnel. There are 10 cases of COVID-19 in the mission in Congo, three cases in the Cyprus mission, two in Central African Republic and one each in Lebanon and the UN Truce Supervision Organisation in the Middle East. Iran has moved to open businesses, religious and cultural sites as it eases restrictions imposed to contain the coronavirus pandemic. Museums and historical sites are to reopen on Sunday to coincide with the Eid el-Fitr celebrations that end the Muslim holy fasting month of Ramadan, President Hassan Rouhani said. Holy shrines will reopen on Monday. Mr Rouhani had said last week that the shrines would open for three hours in the morning and three hours in the afternoon. Some areas of the shrines such as narrow corridors will stay shut. All workers in the country will return to work next Saturday. The President said last week that restaurants would reopen after Ramadan and sports activities would resume without spectators. Universities, but not medical schools, will reopen on June 6. Mr Rouhani said on Saturday that 88 per cent of the fatalities from COVID-19 in Iran were victims with underlying illnesses. Britain will introduce a mandatory 14-day quarantine period for travellers arriving from overseas from June 8, a measure that airlines have warned will devastate their industry. All international arrivals, including returning Britons, will be required to self-isolate and provide details of where they will be staying to the authorities. "Now we are past the peak of this virus, we must take steps to guard against imported cases triggering a resurgence of this deadly disease," said Home Secretary Priti Patel. She said those who breached the quarantine in England could be fined 1,000 pounds ($1,863), and that spot checks would be carried out by health and border officials. The quarantine measures will not apply to those arriving from the Irish Republic, and there are also exemptions for freight drivers, medical professionals and seasonal agricultural workers. Religious gatherings will resume in France after a two-month hiatus caused by the COVID-19 outbreak. The French Interior Ministry said the gatherings would be permitted from the start of June, but worshippers need to wear face masks and observe social distancing of at least 1 metre. The French Government had banned religious services until June 2 even though stores and other businesses started reopening last week. The Council of State, the country's highest administrative body, struck down the ban and the Government published a decree on Saturday allowing services to resume. France has announced 393 new cases of coronavirus in the past 24 hours, continuing a downward trend. Authorities say seven people appear to have been infected with the coronavirus at a restaurant in north-western Germany, in what would be the first such known case since restaurants started reopening in the country two weeks ago. The local government in Leer county said on Friday night that the cases, reported between Tuesday and Friday, led to at least 50 people being quarantined.  Previously, no new cases had been confirmed in the area for over a week. Germany started loosening its coronavirus restrictions on April 20 and that process has gathered pace recently.  Lower Saxony state, where Leer is located, allowed restaurants to reopen on May 11 with hygiene precautions. Colombia has reported its biggest daily increase in new coronavirus cases and deaths as the South American nation's Ministry of Health confirmed 801 new infections and 30 fatalities. Over a quarter of the new cases are in the capital city of Bogota, which has the highest number of COVID-19 infections in the country.  Nationwide, Colombia has diagnosed nearly 20,000 people with the virus. The nation has been on lockdown for nearly two months, though authorities recently began allowing some manufacturing businesses to begin operating. A wider economic opening is expected to take place throughout June. The nation's caseload has been comparatively smaller than other nations in the region: Brazil has confirmed over 300,000 cases and Peru over 110,000. Russian President Vladimir Putin said the outbreak in Russia has begun to abate, creating a positive environment for easing restrictions. Russia currently ranks third after the United States and Brazil in the number of infections with 326,448 cases, including 3,249 deaths. The Russian leader said a steady drop in new cases, from almost 7,000 new cases per day at the peak of the outbreak, to roughly 3,000 now, sets the stage for further lifting of restrictions. Mr Putin noted that the country's hospitals can accommodate over 165,000 coronavirus patients, and they are currently two-thirds occupied. He acknowledged the need to preserve hospital capacity in case of a new wave of contagion as restrictions lift. The COVID-19 mortality rate in Russia has remained remarkably low at about 1 per cent, drawing suspicions in the West that the country was under-reporting its death toll.  Russian officials have rejected the claim, saying that the low toll reflected efficient preventative measures and broad testing. A review of studies around the world by British researchers has found that people under 20 have a 56 per cent lower risk of catching COVID-19.  The review is not without its doubters, however, as some researchers such as those at University College London have said evidence remains "weak" on how likely children were to transmit the virus to others. "Our findings show children and young people appear 56 per cent less likely to contract COVID-19 from infected others," the review team said. "Susceptibility is a key part of the chain of infection, and this supports the view that children are likely to play a smaller role in transmitting the virus and proliferating the pandemic, although considerable uncertainty remains. "This new data provides essential evidence to governments around the world to inform their decision-making on whether to reopen schools and reduce or end lockdown measures." Hertz has filed for bankruptcy, unable to withstand the coronavirus pandemic that has crippled global travel and with it, the heavily indebted 102-year-old car rental company's business.  The US's number two car lease company's lenders were unwilling to grant it another extension on its auto lease debt payments past yesterday's deadline.  Hertz and its subsidiaries will continue to operate, according to a release from the company.  By the end of March, Hertz Global Holdings Inc  whose car-rental bands also include Dollar and Thrifty  had racked up $18.7 billion in debt with only $1 billion of available cash.  "No business is built for zero revenue," former CEO Kathryn Marinello said on May 12. "There's only so long that companies' reserves will carry them." In late March, Hertz shed 12,000 workers and put another 4,000 on furlough, cut vehicle acquisitions by 90 per cent and stopped all nonessential spending. Under bankruptcy protection, creditors will have to settle for less than full repayment. Its biggest creditors are banks, but the filing lists IBM, Lyft, United and Southwest Airlines as others owed between $6 million and $23 million each. The coronavirus pandemic is interrupting immunisation against diseases including measles, polio and cholera that could put the lives of nearly 80 million children under the age of 1 at risk, according to a new analysis from the World Health Organization and partners. In the new report, health officials warned that more than half of 129 countries where immunisation data were available reported moderate, severe or total suspensions of vaccination services during March and April. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "Disruption to immunisation programs from the COVID-19 pandemic threatens to unwind decades of progress against vaccine-preventable diseases like measles," WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said in a statement. UNICEF reported a significant delay in planned vaccine deliveries due to lockdown measures and a dramatic reduction in the number of available flights. "We have effective vaccines against measles, polio and cholera. While circumstances may require us to temporarily pause some immunisation efforts, these immunisations must restart as soon as possible or we risk exchanging one deadly outbreak for another," said Henrietta Fore, UNICEF's executive director. "We cannot let our fight against one disease come at the expense of long-term progress in our fight against other diseases." More than 40 of Africa's 54 nations have closed their borders, though some allow cargo and emergency transport, and 46 campaigns to vaccinate children against polio have been suspended in 38 countries, the majority of which are also in Africa. Measles campaigns have been suspended in 27 countries.  A spokesperson for British Prime Minister Boris Johnson says Government ministers trust principals to make their own decisions in allowing students back to school. The comment comes as the UK Government prepares to release its "roadmap" plan to reopen the UK. Mr Johnson's Government has faced criticism from some teachers and unions over their plan to reopen schools to some pupils from June 1.  They say the move is too early and others that they have little time to prepare buildings for a return under social distancing measures. "We continue to work closely with teachers, schools and the unions to address their concerns," the spokesman said.  "The roadmap sets out plans to get more children into schools in the safest possible way from June 1 at the earliest and we will set out more details on our plans as soon as we can. "We trust head teachers to know the best course of action for their own schools." US President Donald Trump has deemed churches and other houses of worship "essential" services and called on governors to allow them to reopen this weekend despite the threat of the coronavirus. "Today I'm identifying houses of worship  churches, synagogues and mosques  as essential places that provide essential services," said Mr Trump. He said if governors don't abide by his request, he will "override" them, though it's unclear what authority he has to do so. Mr Trump stressed the importance of churches in many communities and took issue with some of the businesses that had been allowed to reopen. "Some governors have deemed liquor stores and abortion clinics as essential" but not churches, he said. "It's not right. So I'm correcting this injustice and calling houses of worship essential." "These are places that hold our society together and keep our people united. The people are demanding to go to church and synagogue, go to their mosque," he said. ABC/wires 
It's a $60 billion error. After touting the impact of the $130 billion JobKeeper package  supposedly keeping about 6.5 million Australians connected to their employers while providing them with liveable pay  the Federal Government has acknowledged its figures were massively overstated. The package is instead projected to cost only $70 billion, and the Government has confirmed only 3.5 million Australians are actually receiving the payment. It's a huge difference from what was projected, but it comes down to about 1,000 businesses messing up their paperwork while applying for the scheme. Here's what happened. As with any application for government help, applying for the JobKeeper payment involves paperwork. More than 910,000 businesses have applied for the scheme, with 759,000 having already finalised their employee declarations, meaning they are eligible to receive payments. But some of those businesses, it seems, made mistakes while filling out their forms. According to the Australian Tax Office (ATO), which is responsible for administering JobKeeper payments, the errors weren't picked up because its focus was on processing payments as quickly as possible. One of the most common mistakes noted by the ATO was businesses mixing up the number of workers they employed with the amount they expected workers to receive. For instance, 550 businesses with just one eligible employee filled out the corresponding section of their forms with "1,500"  presumably in reference to the $1,500-per-fortnight payment made to all eligible workers. Those 550 businesses would have been responsible for an additional 825,000 people being added to the scheme  people that did not exist. But the ultimate discrepancy between the projected and actual number of people on JobKeeper was about 3 million. That still leaves a difference of more than 2.1 million people between the actual numbers and what was initially projected. When the Government first announced the JobKeeper scheme, it said it would cost $130 billion and help about 6 million employees. Those numbers were based on Treasury estimates on the projected need for the scheme. First estimates of the cost of the program were formulated at the height of the coronavirus crisis, with Treasury fearing the health impacts would be severe. As businesses began to register their interest in signing up for the scheme, the numbers appeared to be in line with initial estimates. But Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said on Friday that the economy was doing better than Treasury initially estimated and as a result, fewer people were signing up for JobKeeper. The 1,000 businesses responsible for the error represent just over 0.1 per cent of the 910,000 businesses that have registered for JobKeeper. But the $60 billion reduction in the projected cost of the scheme suggests that small portion was receiving nearly half the money allocated to the scheme. ATO Second Commissioner Jeremy Hirschhorn said it appeared those applicants misunderstood the question on their application forms. "With hindsight, perhaps the form could have been more straightforward, however I do note that only 1,000 of the 900,000 misinterpreted the question," he said. He said that no extra money was paid to businesses, as the question that was misunderstood by some was not linked to payments. "We ask a question for analytical purposes only, not for payment purposes," he said. "It made not one difference to the amount we paid." 
Billionaire mining magnate Clive Palmer has lashed out at Premier Mark McGowan after being refused entry into Western Australia, threatening a High Court challenge to the state's strict state border closure. Mr Palmer said he planned to take the matter to the High Court within days. "We'll be filing papers on Monday and proceeding with a declaration that the lockdown border closure of Western Australia is unconstitutional," he said. "And there's no reason for it at the present time, and that it's just an impediment to the workforce getting back to work and the prosperity of the state." Mr Palmer described the border closure as stupidity on the part of the WA Government. "What [Mr McGowan] is trying to do is against the Australian constitution, and I've got no doubt the High Court will slap him down very quickly," he said. "It's absolute stupidity. What's going to happen in three or four months when our economy is destroyed, people haven't got jobs. "That's not an outcome that we want." He said he would be referencing two sections of the constitution which stated trade and travel between states should be free unless lives were in danger. Mr Palmer also said he did not agree to "totalitarian" conditions which may have allowed him to receive an exemption if he had applied again. "The conditions that they wanted to place on me were that I would tell them where I was going, who I was talking to, and what the subject matter of those conversations was," he said "Which I wasn't prepared to do, that's my private business." The WA Police Force would not confirm if Mr Palmer's application was rejected, saying it would not comment on individual cases. But Premier Mark McGowan said he supported the WA Police Commissioner's decision. "The Police Commissioner makes these decisions based upon the law and the rules we've put in place to protect our citizens," he said. "So, I endorse the Police Commissioner's decision here. He's made it on proper grounds and with the correct purpose behind it. "[He] has clearly said to Mr Palmer that he can't fly in and fly out because he's not one of the exempt people. "The Police Commissioner has made many decisions to keep people out." Mr McGowan said so much work had been done to tackle the virus and he did not want to risk infection coming in from anywhere. "We are trying to keep the health of West Australians safe, and if Mr Palmer doesn't like it  he's subject to the law just like everyone else." WA has closed its borders to the east for the first time in history. Here's how you might be affected. "The medical advice we have is very clear, that our interstate border is important to protect the health of West Australians. He also said he hoped Mr Palmer's case did not have a chance in the High Court. "Well I hope not," he said. "We will fight him in the High Court. "All of our legal advice says that putting in place the rules to protect our state based upon health grounds is justified. "So we've done it for the right reasons to protect the people of Western Australia." 
Chief Minister Michael Gunner says the Northern Territory is "uniquely positioned" to lead Australia's post-pandemic economic recovery and has established a special commission to figure out exactly how to capitalise on the crisis. In announcing the initial membership of the Territory Economic Reconstruction Commission on Friday, Mr Gunner said Australia was going through a "once-in-a-lifetime crisis" which could also be a "once-in-a-lifetime opportunity" for the Territory. Mr Gunner said post-COVID-19, Australia would have to become more self-reliant and the future for manufacturing was in the North. "We look at our solar reserves and our gas reserves and we are uniquely positioned to solve Australia's problems  we need to take advantage of that opportunity," he said. Mr Gunner said the Commission would investigate how to create jobs in the NT, attract investment and build on its strategic advantages  establishing it as "Australia's comeback capital". "We are a $26 billion economy right now, I believe we can be a $40 billion economy by 2030 with 35,000 new jobs," he said.  See more news and analysis about this year's NT election. But it will be at least six months until any of the Commissions' recovery plans become a reality  with an interim report expected to be handed down in late-July and a final report in November. Commission members include Gary Higgins, who retired as opposition leader in January; Infrastructure Australia CEO Romilly Madew; NT Treaty Commissioner Mick Dodson; Beyond Zero Emissions CEO Eytan Lenko; former NT chief minister Paul Henderson; former secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet Martin Parkinson and former CEO of Westpac Gail Kelly.  Next week, Mr Gunner will announce two more Commission members and its co-chairs.  Each of the nine members can earn up to $44,000 a year for their contribution, which means for six months' work each person can pocket up to $22,000  a total cost to the taxpayer of $198,000.  Opposition Leader Lia Finocchiaro, who took the helm at the Country Liberal Party in January, criticised Mr Gunner's fiscal management over his Government's term  claiming the Committee would not be necessary if the NT Government had managed the books better. "For four years under Labor our economy has become the worst-performing economy in the nation," she said. "It is not credible three months out from the election for the Gunner Government to say to Territorians: 'we have a plan'. The fact is, they don't." "The need for this reconstruction commission really reflects the inability of the Gunner Labor Government to to generate growth in our economy." Yesterday, the NT announced it had zero active cases of coronavirus, with all 29 confirmed cases of COVID-19 now recovered.  Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Despite the good news and calls from industry, Mr Gunner said he would not commit to a date when the NT's borders would re-open.  "I know that the calls for us to quickly relax our hard borders will grow louder," he said.  "The danger of coronavirus is still out there and we need to keep it out." Mr Gunner said as soon as there was a "hard date" for when the NT's strict border security measures would ease, he would make the announcement and ensure there was plenty of time for NT businesses to plan their recovery. 
The United States has secured almost a third of the first 1 billion doses planned for AstraZeneca's experimental COVID-19 vaccine by pledging up to $US1.2 billion ($1.84 billion), as world powers scramble for medicines to get their economies back to work. While not yet proven to be effective against the coronavirus, vaccines are seen by world leaders as the only real way to restart their stalled economies and even to get an edge over global competitors. After US President Donald Trump demanded a vaccine, the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) agreed to provide up to $US1.2 billion to accelerate British drug maker AstraZeneca's vaccine development and secure 300 million doses for the United States  which has a population of almost 330 million. "This contract with AstraZeneca is a major milestone in Operation Warp Speed's work toward a safe, effective, widely available vaccine by 2021," US Health Secretary Alex Azar said.  The first doses could be available in the United States as early as October, according to a statement from the HHS. The vaccine was developed by the University of Oxford and licensed to AstraZeneca.  Immunity to the new coronavirus is uncertain and so the use of vaccines is unclear. The US deal allows a late-stage, or phase three, clinical trial of the vaccine with 30,000 people in the United States. England-based AstraZeneca said it had concluded agreements for at least 400 million doses of the vaccine and secured manufacturing capacity for 1 billion doses. The first deliveries of the vaccines are due in September. Now the most valuable company on Britain's blue-chip FTSE 100 Index, AstraZeneca has already agreed to deliver 100 million doses to people in Britain, with 30 million as soon as September. Ministers have promised Britain will get first access to the vaccine. With leaders across the world surveying some of the worst economic destruction since World War II and the deaths of more than 327,000 people, many are scrambling for a vaccine. The US Government has struck deals to support vaccine development with Johnson & Johnson (J&J), Moderna and Sanofi, sparking fears the richest countries will be able to protect their citizens first. Sanofi's chief angered the French Government earlier this month when he said vaccine doses produced in the United States could go to US patients first, given the country had supported the research financially. "We have a lot of things happening on the vaccine front or the therapeutic front," Mr Trump told reporters at the White House when asked about the AstraZeneca announcement.  AstraZeneca said it was in talks with governments and partners around the world  such as the Serum Institute of India  to increase access and production and is speaking to various organisations on fair allocation and distribution. The Serum Institute of India, the world's largest maker of vaccines by volume, has dedicated one of its facilities with a capacity to produce up to 400 million doses annually to producing the Oxford vaccine. "We are scaling up on a conservative basis of about 4-5 million doses a month, to begin with," Chief Executive Adar Poonawalla told Reuters, adding the company was in discussions with AstraZeneca. A phase one and two clinical trial of the vaccine began last month to assess safety, immunogenicity and efficacy in over 1,000 healthy volunteers aged 18 to 55 across several trial centres in southern England.  Data from the trial is expected shortly. There are currently no approved treatments or vaccines for COVID-19. Governments, drug makers and researchers are working on around 100 programs.  Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Experts are predicting a safe, effective means of preventing the disease could take 12 to 18 months to develop. Only a handful of the vaccines in development have advanced to human trials, an indicator of safety and efficacy, and the stage at which most fail. "AstraZeneca recognises that the vaccine may not work but is committed to progressing the clinical program with speed and scaling up manufacturing at risk," a company statement said. Other drug makers are in various stages of vaccine development. US-based Inovio Pharmaceuticals said on Wednesday its experimental vaccine produced protective antibodies and immune system responses in mice and guinea pigs. And Moderna this week released positive data for its potential vaccine, which it said produced protective antibodies in a small group of healthy volunteers. Reuters 
Coronavirus restrictions in Australia, are easing and that means there's more and more people getting out and about.  But COVID-19 is still out there and people have been urged to be cautious and stay vigilant about protecting themselves as best they can. In other countries, that protection includes a face mask  some choose to wear them, others have to. In Australia, though, the broad advice remains that most people don't need one.  Here's what we know so far about why that is and whether it's likely to change.  Many countries around the world, as well as some US states, have implemented various directions for people to wear face masks in public places to try and limit the spread of coronavirus. In parts of Asia, it's almost expected out of courtesy and safety to wear a face mask, but places like Singapore have now introduced fines if people don't wear one. And in the US, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends "wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain". Some states have enforced the use of masks in shops or other public spaces and the CDC has encouraged people to make their own cloth masks. In Australia, the current advice from the Federal Government is that the majority of people won't benefit from wearing a surgical mask and if you're well, you don't need one. There are different requirements for people who have returned from certain locations overseas, who think may they have been in contact with a confirmed case of coronavirus or who have tested positive, but broadly, surgical masks aren't strongly recommended or required. University of the Sunshine Coast nursing program leader Matt Mason says the biggest difference between those countries and Australia is the level of risk. "The main difference is that we simply don't have the same burden of disease that America or the UK or some of the other countries have," he says. "The risk of catching the disease is much, much lower here because we simply don't have it circulating to the same extent that America has." Australia's advice on face masks currently matches up with the World Health Organization, which recommends that if you're healthy, you only need to wear a mask if you're caring for someone with COVID-19. The quick answer is that healthy people still don't need to wear a mask. University of New South Wales infectious disease epidemiologist Abrar Chughtai says that advice isn't expected to change in Australia in the near future unless there's a significant spike in cases.  "It's not to protect healthy people, but to prevent the spread of infection," he says. "Generally, masks aren't very good to protect healthy people. "At some stage, if we have a second wave or widespread cases in the community, I'm sure the Australian Government will also recommend the use of masks but at this stage, you should not need one." There's also no rule that says you can't wear a mask  but it's important to think about how you're wearing it. "I don't think there's any problem with people wanting to wear a mask. But there are some things we need to consider," Mr Mason says. "The risks for the person who's wearing them come from how they interact with that mask in terms of taking it on and off, maybe reusing it, or fiddling with it while they're wearing it. "While a mask can do that because it's a physical barrier, what we do see is that people fiddle with the mask and are therefore putting your hands, which could be dirty, around your face." Nope, you don't really need gloves either. Gloves, like masks, can act as a barrier between your hands and whatever you're touching, but that means pretty much nothing if you still touch your face with gloves on. Dr Chughtai says if you're out and about, gloves can actually lead you to wash your hands less  and that's not good. "The virus will not transmit through skin, it needs a portal of entry and that could be through the mouth, nose or eyes," he says. "The general public don't need to use gloves. They should wash their hands and  avoid touching their face." Gloves are also similar to masks in that they're single-use. So, if you're not working in a high-contact environment and you're powering through a new pair every time you touch something different, that's a lot of demand and a lot of waste. "It's probably easier and better for the environment just to have alcohol-based hand sanitiser and clean your hands more frequently than to wear gloves," Mr Mason says. "Again, gloves give you that false sense of security that you're protected, but you're really not. "For people who are out and about or returning to work, that attention to detail on hand hygiene and trying not to transfer things from the environment to your face is going to be really important." Not much different from the advice we've been given from the start: wash your hands, don't touch your face and stay home if you're sick. As restrictions ease, that could become trickier  but Mr Mason says we have to try. "Something we're potentially likely to see here in Australia is people may put a mask on when they're not feeling 100 per cent and go to work or school, which is what we don't want people doing," he says. "Even though that mask is designed to stop someone coughing and spluttering over others, we don't want unwell people at work. "There's a whole range of social reasons why that's an easy thing to say and not an easy thing to do, because Australia is a highly casualised workforce." Dr Chughtai says the most important thing at this stage is to maintain social distancing and keep washing your hands. "We don't need to panic. People should focus on Government instructions like keeping a safe distance," he says. 
Former Australian captain Allan Border has spoken out against suggestions the IPL could be scheduled in place of the World T20 tournament later this year, describing it as a "money grab" by Indian cricket.      The World T20 is scheduled to run from October 18 to November 15 this year at various venues across Australia. However, the coronavirus pandemic  which has already caused the postponement or cancellation of many major sporting events in this country and overseas  has placed the future of this year's tournament in doubt. Reports this week have suggested that the Indian cricket board, the BCCI, is looking at trying to reschedule the lucrative IPL tournament for the same window as the World T20. Border told ABC's Grandstand Cafe radio program he would not agree with any attempt to run the IPL in place of the world tournament. "[I'm] not happy with that, the world game should take precedence over a local competition," Border said. "So, the World T20, if that can't go ahead, I don't think the IPL can go ahead. "I would question that decision [to replace it]  it's just a money grab, isn't it, that one? "The World T20 should take precedence, for sure." Asked what impression it would leave if India was able to go ahead with the IPL in an alternative window, Border said it would send the wrong signal to world cricket. "That would be just shut the gate, you know, India running the game. "They're pretty close to it now, but I suppose if you're responsible for 80 per cent of global [cricket] income, you're going to have a fair say in what goes on, I get that," Border said. "But I think the world game can't allow that to happen. "The home boards should stop their players going to the IPL, if that's the case. "I don't think you can have India superseding what the international game has in place. That would be going down the wrong path." Border was also asked about the Sheffield Shield's relevance to producing Australian Test cricketers, as questions are raised over the domestic competition's place in the schedule for the summer of cricket. "I feel it does [have relevance], if you talk to the players they are of that opinion as well, they love playing Sheffield Shield cricket," he said. "I think it still has the same relevance. I think it's got to be very hard to develop good, all-round cricketers, just through short-form cricket. "I think the long form of the game really does set your technique in place as a bowler or as a batsman, and then you can move into those other, shorter forms of the game. "There's a bit more power-hitting involved and different tactics as a bowler  developing your skills there, but the ultimate is, I think, to play that first-class cricket and that area of the game really develops your best players." The former Australian skipper said authorities would have to relax the rules on tampering with cricket balls, as the governing body looks at its response to the coronavirus. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. An ICC committee has this week recommended a rule change to stop the use of saliva to shine the ball, with a decision expected next month. "I suppose sweat and saliva are going to be very similar  if you've got the virus, you're going to pass it on, aren't you? Border said. "They will obviously have to relax the rules over polishing the cricket ball with some sort of substance other than sweat or saliva. "Whether you're allowed to scratch it, or put saliva to shine it on one side, or picking the seam  there's always something going on about the cricket ball, isn't there? "It's a very important part of our game, particularly the Test match game, or the longer-form game, rather than white-ball cricket. "It will be a challenge to see what the powers-that-be come up with  the bowlers have got to be able to do something with the cricket ball, not just let the ball go so the batsmen can smash it everywhere. "They've got to be able to shine the ball to try and extract some swing, that type of thing." 
The Taste of Tasmania, which has been a key event on the Hobart social calendar for more than 30 years, looks set to be cancelled for the first time in its history as a result of uncertainty around the coronavirus pandemic and the council's struggling finances.  Hobart City Council officers have recommended the event  which usually costs ratepayers about $1 million  not go ahead this year "due to the number of uncertainties for large events coupled with Council's need to reprioritise funding for the coming year". Officers said the event would be "difficult to justify" at a time when the Council "really needs the money elsewhere". The Taste of Tasmania runs between Christmas and New Year's Eve, and averages about 30,000 attendees each day.  It is also a focal point for the Sydney-to-Hobart yacht race with festivalgoers celebrating the finish and watching the rest of the fleet arrive. Race organisers are yet to make any announcements about this year's event. The Taste decision is another blow to festival tourism after the mid-winter event Dark Mofo was also canned this year.  Hobart Mayor Anna Reynolds said the council's revenue was expected to fall by $22 million, or almost 20 per cent of the council's budget, due to the pandemic.  "We are having to make cuts in a whole range of places," she said.  "Given commercial sponsorship of the Taste would probably be very hard to get this year it would just be too risky for our ratepayers to fund a Taste that might not be able to happen, might have to be really small, and might be still very risky in the current environment. "An event as large and complex as the Taste does need lead time, and given the uncertainty around the tourism industry, the rules around large gatherings, but also just our budget as a city ... it's really not practical to have the Taste this year." In a statement, the Tasmanian Government said its funding contribution to the event of $500,000 over two years was secure but urged the council to find an alternative. "Now is not the time to abandon such an important event for Tasmania and while it is still too early to determine whether an event that attracts that many people can go ahead, we would encourage the council to work with all relevant stakeholders to plan for and identify options that work for all," it said. The Tourism Industry is concerned cancelling the event could be the final straw for many small stallholders who rely on the event for their survival.  Daniel Leesong, chairman of the Tourism Industry Council Tasmania and operator of Coal River Farm, said the Taste was too important not to go ahead, and a private operator might need to step in.  Mr Leesong said if the council could not take responsibility for the event, the industry would need to band together to find an alternative model "simply because it's a marquee event that's so successful". "Many of the stallholders rely on the Taste for their significant revenue source for their annual turnover," he said.  "Not only is it going to have an immediate negative impact for a lot of the smaller stall holders, but it's also going to have a potentially fatal impact long term.  "Those businesses simply won't be able to survive." Ghost Rock Vineyard owner Alicia Peardon has been forced to shut her cellar door and eatery for the time being.  The north-west based business has a stall at the Taste every year, and Ms Peardon said the expected cancellation was disappointing but understandable.  "It's a huge impact for Tasmania and for producers like us because we do rely quite heavily on it, but it's not surprising either given the current circumstances," she said.  "As long as social distancing is around it's hard to see how events like that can go ahead." Council officers have recommended consideration be given to a smaller New Year's Eve event. "There is no doubt 2020 has been and will be an extremely hard year for our community and our businesses and a smaller celebration of this could be a fitting way to see out the year," the report said. A decision on whether the Taste goes ahead will be made by the council on Monday.  
The number of people on JobKeeper has been revised down by 3 million, with Treasury and the Australian Tax Office (ATO) blaming businesses for making "significant errors" in their applications. The estimated cost of the program has been nearly halved from $130 billion to about $70 billion. In a statement, Treasury and the ATO said the mistake came from businesses reporting how much financial assistance they expected to receive, instead of how many employees they thought would be eligible. "For example, over 500 businesses with '1' eligible employee reported a figure of '1,500' (which is the amount of JobKeeper payment they would expect to receive for each fortnight for that employee)," the departments said. ATO Second Commissioner Jeremy Hirschhorn said the error was discovered at the start of this week and the Treasurer was told about the issue on Thursday evening. "With hindsight, perhaps the form could have been more straightforward," he said.  "The question was reasonably clear, it is just unfortunate that 1,000 employers misunderstood it."   Based on the original estimates, Treasury believed the program would subsidise the wages of 6.5 million workers. That has now been revised down to 3.5 million. Federal Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said the error was "good news" and "importantly" the error contained "no consequences for JobKeeper payments that have already been made". "It is welcome news that the impact on the public purse from the program will not be as great as initially estimated," he said. Speaking on Afternoon Briefing, Mr Frydenberg said the Government would not be reallocating the rest of the forecast funding for JobKeeper to other areas, saying it was all "borrowed money" and the error meant less would have to be repaid by future generations. "This is a very uncertain time. I'm not blaming Treasury; I'm not blaming the ATO. No underpayments were made, no overpayments were made." Despite the Treasurer ruling out diverting the unspent money elsewhere, groups including the Council of Small Business, described the error as an opportunity for the Government to expand the scheme. "Migrant workers or people on visas who haven't been eligible so far, there's a lot of them that work for small businesses and I know it's been a concern for a lot of employers out there," Council chief executive officer Peter Strong said. "So, I suggest the Government should have a look at that." Federal Labor leader Anthony Albanese described the bungle as "an absolute shambles". "This is a mistake you could have seen from space," he said. "This is a Government that couldn't run a bath, let alone be good economic managers. "The fact is if you can't get this right, how can you get the economic recovery right?" The JobKeeper scheme is the centrepiece of the Government's coronavirus support package, offering businesses who have experienced a downturn in revenue a wage subsidy for eligible workers. The error was discovered by the ATO and Treasury after they analysed the amounts that were being paid out by the scheme to businesses and comparing them with the estimates of how many employees would be eligible. "It was not picked up by the ATO earlier as their primary focus in the first fortnight of JobKeeper payments was on ensuring that JobKeeper payments were paid promptly to those eligible for them, and not paid to those who were ineligible," the departments said. "These initial estimates from businesses of employees covered are not linked to payments, and so were not as carefully analysed." 
On September the 11th 2001, not half an hour after the second plane smashed into the twin towers, a ministerial adviser in the UK sent an email saying, "it's now a very good day to get out anything we want to bury".  She saw a crisis as an opportunity. So, it appears to be seen in Beijing.  With the world focused on a pandemic that started in China, now is the moment chosen by the Chinese leadership to introduce a security law.  Pro-democracy activists in Hong Kong fear it could be the death of their beloved territory.  Dennis Kwok is a Civic Party politician and warned that if the law comes into force "one country, two systems will officially be erased. This is the end of Hong Kong".  During last year's sometimes violent protests, the constant question was 'what is Beijing going to do?' Now we know.  During the turmoil, there was surprise among some that the authorities in China did not directly intervene, even though it had troops stationed in the territory and it appeared Chinese soldiers and equipment were being massed on the border.  Perhaps the explanation was the global reaction to the bloody crushing of the Tiananmen Square protests in 1989.  In Australia, a sobbing prime minister Bob Hawke condemned the massacre and allowed Chinese students in our country to remain here.  The Chinese Government took years to move on from being seen as a pariah state.  Ironically the very virus that has drawn the world's attention provides a handy diversion from the country where it all started.  Not that the proposed new law is going totally unnoticed.  President Trump has threatened to react but has not said what he has in mind. Even a few months ago the Chinese might have been more cautious and fearful of a negative reaction, especially from the US. But with Donald Trump recently in full anti-Chinese flight, there is not so much to lose anymore. The trade wars between the US and China have been eclipsed by the US President's condemnation of Beijing for its handling of COVID-19.  If it's China's fault, therefore responsibility for the world's worst death toll can't be his.  Trump's China tirades appear central to his re-election strategy.  He blames America's horrible death toll and its damaged economy on a nation that, for now, feels less inclined to worry about Washington's opinions.  And it would have been surprising if the Chinese leadership had not developed a strategy to counter the pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong.  Add to that the muscular promotion of expansionist nationalism under Xi Jinping and the stage is again set for more trouble ahead, and not just in Hong Kong.  The Taiwanese leadership will be watching with alarm. Imposing new laws is just the first step. The question then is enforcement.  The very existence of sedition legislation may act as a brake on some protesters who fear they could be jailed for years on orders from Beijing.  But it would be naive to underestimate the determination of many in Hong Kong who have previously spent months battling in the streets against what they see as Beijing's creeping authoritarianism in the territory.  If, as expected, the laws are approved, then we will hear diplomatic protests from the US, Britain, and possibly, Australia and others.  But with the world focused on COVID-19, it probably won't unduly worry the Chinese leadership.  The vague threat of action by Trump may have consequences, but the President's promises are not always followed by action. From the Chinese Government's point of view Hong Kong is a problem to be managed. And this law, it appears, is the mechanism.  Xi Jinping will not lose sleep worrying about the erosion of democratic freedoms enshrined in the 50-year agreement signed with Britain 23 years ago But do not expect Hong Kongers to simply take it. The streets will most likely again become battlefields.  Despite the new threats of arrest and prosecution, many who maintained the rage last year will feel even more strongly there is nothing left to lose. It feels like a collision is inevitable. How, where and when is impossible to know. But clearly the Chinese leadership is feeling strong enough to risk whatever lies ahead. 
An online food network platform developed in Violet Town has taken off across the world as producers look for alternative ways to sell produce. Serenity Hill and Kirsten Larsen, cofounders of the Open Food Network, launched the not-for-profit platform in 2012 after noticing a gap in the market. "We realised supply chains were a critical problem," Ms Larsen said. "There was a disconnect between farmers doing great sustainable farming and the customers that wanted it." Ms Larsen said the platform connected farmers with their communities and put the power of buying and selling back into the hands of the consumer and producer. "We wanted to get more of the retail dollar in farmers pockets and support more sustainable food," she said. The platform acts as a directory where anyone can create a profile and be located through a simple search on a map. Producers can also create their own shop where they can collect payment and sell produce. "It's particularly designed to support the different distribution systems," Ms Larsen said. "Producers can set up a bunch of different shipping methods such as drop-off to people's houses, have a collection point, or pick-up from farms." What started as a grass roots initiative now spans 13 countries, among them Brazil, the Philippines and Italy. Ms Hill said the first global affiliates  and the biggest  were the UK and France. "Canada and the US have also come along and joined the global collective," she said. Subscribe to Rural RoundUp: Stories from the farm. More farmers got on board when the pandemic hit and supply chains began to shut down, along with many farmers' markets, restaurants and cafes. Ms Hill said producers had to start searching for alternative ways to sell their products, leading to a major expansion of the platform. "COVID-19 really was the catalyst," she said. "We had a tenfold increase in people signing up for the platform and a tenfold increase in turn over through the platform." Ms Larsen said it was critical to get the framework right . "It's not about us doing it," she said. "It's about how we create a space so people can see the possibilities and get onboard to make it happen for themselves." 
China's Government has announced close to $430 billion worth of stimulus funding to help the world's second-largest economy remain stable. The battle against the coronavirus "has not yet come to an end," Premier Li Keqiang warned in a report to the National People's Congress of China. He called on the country to "redouble our efforts" to revive the struggling economy, and said Beijing would skip setting a growth target in order to focus on fighting the disease.  The world's second-largest economy contracted by 6.8 per cent in the three months ending in March after factories, offices, travel and other businesses were shut down to fight the virus.  Mr Li said Beijing would give local governments 2 trillion yuan ($429 billion) to spend on preventing job losses, making sure the public's basic needs were met and helping private companies survive. China, where the pandemic began in December, was the first economy to reopen but is struggling to revive activity.  Private sector analysts say as many as 30 per cent of the country's 442 million urban workers  or as many as 130 million people  lost jobs at least temporarily when the economy shut down to fight the virus, and as many as 25 million jobs might be lost for good this year.  The Government's budget deficit will swell by 1 trillion yuan ($214 billion) this year to help meet targets including creating 9 million new urban jobs, Mr Li said.  "These are extraordinary measures for an unusual time," he said in his nationally televised speech. Read more about coronavirus:A breakdown of which restrictions will be eased across Australia this weekAnatomy of an outbreak: How the Ruby Princess nightmare unfolded Mr Li said the ruling Communist Party would not set a GDP target, usually a closely watched feature of government plans, due to the "great uncertainty" of the epidemic. Factories and shops have reopened but consumer spending, the main engine of economic growth, is weak. Forecasters say China is likely to face a wave of politically volatile job losses later in the year due to weak US and European demand for Chinese exports. Mr Li warned that ensuring economic growth was "of crucial significance" and said pressure on employment had "risen significantly." The announcement comes as trade tensions between China and Australia continue to be strained.  China's top diplomat in Western Australia, Consul General Dong Zhihua, returned to Shanghai this week after the country implemented tariffs on Australian barley.   Australia's barley exports to China were worth $600 million in 2019, and there are fears the new tariffs could decimate the industry. Western Australia will suffer the most, with 88 per cent of Australia's barley exports coming from the state.  ABC/AP 
Parents grappling with helping their children learn remotely during the coronavirus pandemic might breathe a little easier knowing the situation almost sent one of the country's most loved educators "berserk".  Children's author Mem Fox said it only took two days of trying to teach her grandchild maths to push her to the edge. Fox worked as an educator for decades but said it did little to prepare her for the frustration of teaching a primary school student how to multiply. "The methods of teaching have changed  we weren't taught the techniques they're using now so I was trying to learn while teaching and it made me feel like weeping with ineptitude," she said. Students in NSW and Queensland will head back to school full-time from Monday, ending eight weeks of remote learning for all children except those with parents who work in essential services. At the height of the coronavirus pandemic, school attendance rates were roughly 10 per cent in NSW. In Victoria, students in prep, Year 1, Year 2, Year 11 and Year 12 will return to school on Tuesday, May 26, and those from Year 3 to Year 10 are expected to return on June 9. WA students have already returned, after being ordered back into classrooms on May 18. A survey of 10,000 teachers found only 35 per cent of teachers felt students had adequate resources at home  including having a freely available adult on hand to assist, along with technology or even a desk. While the time spent at home varied from state to state, anecdotal evidence suggests many parents felt overwhelmed with their newfound responsibilities. Pasi Sahlberg, from the Gonski Institute at the University of NSW, assured parents that learning comes in many forms. "The cold fact is most of the information they're taught at school they forget anyway," he said. "If you did your best that's good enough." Professor Sahlberg, who is a renowned international education expert, said students' emotional wellbeing will be more important than their cognitive learning over the next few months. "They're probably not showing it but coping with the pandemic means there's a lot going through their little minds," he said. He said making sure children felt happy and safe was more important than catching up on missed lessons. Ms Fox wants parents and grandparents feeling inadequate to know their attempts at remote learning, were unlikely to have a lasting impact. "I think kids can go off for six months on a boat trip and come back and be fine," she said. The author said she "nearly went berserk" trying to home school her grandchildren and had a simple message for anyone who thinks parents did not need to become teachers during the pandemic. "That's absolutely crap," she said. "You can't be at home with your kids without taking on the teacher role  that's a contradiction in terms." "You had to guide, explain, unpick problems, encourage, challenge, be kind, be strict  everything a teacher had to do  without a four-year degree to prepare them." 
Three Queensland Reds players, including Wallabies lock Izack Rodda, have ended a stand-off with Rugby Australia (RA) by terminating their contracts. Rodda, along with Reds teammates Harry Hockings and Isaac Lucas, had refused to take short-term pay cuts of an average 60 per cent that their Australian Super Rugby counterparts accepted following the suspension of the competition because of the coronavirus pandemic. This move prompted the Reds to stand down the three players ahead of last Monday's return to training. The players' agent, Anthony Picone, argued the Reds had no legal grounds to do so and this morning he confirmed the termination of their RA and Queensland Rugby Union (QRU) contracts. "It is disappointing the QRU chose to air the issues publicly," Picone said in a statement. "Given the parlous state of rugby in Australia and Queensland we offered the organisation the opportunity to deal with these matters in private and confidentially. This offer was rejected." The trio were the only players of the 192 Australian Super Rugby professionals to baulk at the salary hits that will be revised once a schedule and broadcast deal is finalised for the truncated competition due to begin in July. Rodda, who has played 25 Tests for the Wallabies, was reportedly at odds with Reds coach Brad Thorn and seeking a move to a rival Australian team. Hockings, a lock who is regarded as one of the rising stars of Australian rugby, and fly half Lucas were believed to be assessing their options overseas. Rodda and Lucas were both contracted until 2023, while Hockings was off contract at the end of this season. "This is their livelihood. It is only reasonable that talented players want to secure stable employment during these times," Picone said. Picone has long ruffled feathers at the Reds. He arranged a move to Japan for former Reds captain Samu Kerevi last year, while he also facilitated the exits of Wallabies players Will Genia and Liam Gill. RA and QRU are yet to comment on the decision made by the three players. The development comes after RA made changes to its leadership team in recent weeks, as it struggles to meet the financial challenges caused by the coronavirus shutdown. Hamish McLennan was announced as its new chairman last week, while Rob Clarke was appointed interim chief executive earlier this month. Clarke replaced Raelene Castle, who stood down as chief executive in April. AAP 
Donations of warm clothing have been distributed to locked-down residents at a central Queensland Indigenous community just ahead of an expected cold snap. The eased restrictions were cancelled after a confirmed case of COVID-19 in Rockhampton, so the community has relied on donations of warm clothing Woorabinda has been in lockdown for two months and last week the community voted to ease restrictions enough to allow residents to do essential shopping in Rockhampton over the following two Saturdays. This was cancelled after a nurse in Rockhampton was diagnosed with COVID-19, so the community put out a call for donations  and it was answered. Warm clothes, blankets, towels and shoes were delivered this week and the Red Cross coordinated distribution to the community just in time for overnight temperatures falling as low as two degrees in some parts of central Queensland this weekend. Red Cross service manager Rhonda Hill said the arrival of winter woollies was a highlight in a challenging time.  "People are still in good spirits, but it was a little disheartening, especially after the community vote, and we were going to get out and get the winter clothes," said Ms Hill. "It is what it is, and we understand and accept it.  "It's about our safety, especially our elders." Tight restrictions under the Federal Biosecurity Act mean any resident who leaves must quarantine for 14 days before returning.  Woorabinda Aboriginal Shire Council negotiated two 12-hour windows for essential shopping with the local disaster management group before the COVID-19 case in Rockhampton. It will review the situation next week.  Since the lockdown, a transfer station at the entrance to Woorabinda is a link to the outside world where supplies are left twice a week. It also gives families an opportunity to see each other. "It's quite hard for grandparents to see grandchildren  they just want to hug but they can't do that because we've got to respect the 1.5 metre distance," Ms Hill said. "But seeing them has given us an opportunity to have that peace of mind." The Red Cross and other organisations in Woorabinda collect goods delivered to the station, sanitise them and organise collection by the family. "This brings such a relief to families and it's well received by the community," Ms Hill said. 
Premier Gladys Berejiklian says pubs, cafes and restaurants will be able to serve up to 50 people at a time from June 1, as NSW coronavirus cases continue to decline. The Premier described expanding the social-distancing limits as a "big step" in the state's economic recovery from COVID-19. Under the new measures, hospitality venues will be required to adhere to strict guidelines to operate: Since last Friday, pubs, restaurants and cafes have been able to serve a maximum of 10 patrons at a time in NSW. But the new, more relaxed restrictions, mean Australia's worst-affected coronavirus state will soon have the nation's most relaxed social-distancing laws, bar the Northern Territory. Health Minister Brad Hazzard said NSW was leading the national fight against the virus. "It's time to get out, time to enjoy yourself, but also it's time to be very, very cautious, because the virus is still amongst us," he said. Mr Hazzard said people going to restaurants should be "washing your hands like you've never done before". The Premier will not direct police to count the number of patrons at each location. Her Government is still working with the hospitality industry to "fine-tune" the new regulations. She said any venue found in breach would be closed down. One idea, suggested by Mr Hazzard, was for all patrons at a venue to provide their name and phone number on entry, to make contact tracing infections easier. NSW Treasurer Dominic Perrottet said there were 280,000 people who applied JobKeeper nationally who worked in the hospitality sector. He said cafes, restaurants and pubs would be central to the state's economic recovery from the virus, and opening them would ensure that when the JobKeeper program ends, people would have paid work. Deputy Premier John Barilaro said the increased cap would be a boon for regional businesses, which were struggling amid the coronavirus lockdown. The changes to restaurant rules will coincide with the same deadline that regional travel will be eased in NSW. "We've opened up the regions and now it's our happy hour, time to wine and dine," Mr Barilaro said. Mr Hazzard said Australia was leading the world in the fight against the virus. "And NSW is leading Australia yet again," he said. 
Women's rights groups fear lockdowns to stem the spread of COVID-19 will see a spike in cases of female genital mutilation (FGM) worldwide, with Australian activists concerned the practice could be on the rise behind closed doors. In Somalia, aid groups have seen an "alarming spike" in demand for FGM services as cutters are going door-to-door during coronavirus lockdowns and school closures, Plan International Australia has warned. The United Nations Population Fund, meanwhile, recently predicted some 2 million extra cases of FGM and 13 million additional child marriages would occur over the next decade due to COVID-19. But in Australia, it's the relative silence that has anti-FGM campaigners worried. WARNING: This story contains graphic descriptions which may disturb some readers. FGM, sometimes called female circumcision, is the partial or total cutting of the clitoris and other external genitalia and in Somalia, the vaginal opening is often sewn up  a procedure called infibulation, the most severe form of FGM. FGM has no health benefits and can leave girls with infections, bleeding, chronic pain and psychological injuries. The procedure can result in death. Sadia Allin said she was alarmed when a woman knocked on her door and offered to cut her daughters, aged just five and nine. Ms Allin, Plan International's head of mission in Somalia, was subjected to genital mutilation when she was a child and is determined that her daughters will not undergo it. "I was shocked," she said. "What was really scary is  my girls are safe with me from FGM  but I was so scared for the girls next door." She said healthcare workers across the country and nurses they partner with reported a spike in requests for FGM to be carried out while daughters were home from school. "Most disturbingly, we have seen an increase in FGM incidents across the country," she said. "The restrictive impact of COVID-19 has forced girls out of school and that has increased their vulnerability to forms of violence in their homes, including FGM." Bring your daughter to "mass circumcision" for $10, a Facebook advertisement in Indonesia's South Sulawesi province reads. In rural areas, female genital mutilation is still in high demand. Ms Allin said FGM is often seen as an essential part of womanhood and a precondition for marriage in Somalia. Somalia's constitution states that the circumcision of girls is "tantamount to torture" and is prohibited, but the country does not have a law against FGM. As coronavirus spreads around the globe, health experts and aid groups fear some of the world's most vulnerable countries in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and the Pacific could become new hotspots for COVID-19. Ms Allin said what was concerning was that some cutters who had given up FGM had now resumed the harmful practice due to the economic crisis spurred by the lockdown. "We are losing the gains we made," she said. "You might say the number [of girls subjected to FGM] in Somalia was already 98 per cent, so what's the difference? The reason for the alarm is the very short period of time. "It has to do with gender inequality  [it sends the message] that girls don't have the right to own their own body. And it impacts everything, from education [to] their ambition for leadership." The African continent has over 95,000 cases of coronavirus and nearly 3,000 deaths, according to the African Centres for Disease Control. In Somalia, there are just over 1,500 cases and 61 deaths, according to the Johns Hopkins University COVID-19 map. African-Australian activist Khadija Gbla said she usually gets half a dozen calls each month from concerned teachers, social workers, or girls themselves at risk of FGM here. But in the past couple of months, she's not had a single one  and "that is the most dangerous thing," she told the ABC. "Nothing. It's been crickets, complete crickets, that is the worrisome part of it," Ms Gbla said. "Kids are stuck at home with parents and can't actually reach for help. The problem is that we won't actually see the damage until this is all over, and then we're going to have a whole range of children who have been cut or mutilated. "The restrictions in place have created a breeding ground for this to take place." A new documentary starts a conversation about the widespread and unregulated practice of female circumcision in Malaysia. In Australia, an estimated 53,000 women have undergone FGM but Ms Gbla said there are 11 girls "at risk" of FGM in Australia each day.  FGM is illegal in Australia and there have been three successful prosecutions against the practice in recent years. Ms Gbla said while trips overseas to countries where FGM is commonplace have stopped due to global travel bans, that was not much comfort for her foundation, The Desert Flower Centre, which is aware of individuals in Australia who will perform FGM for a little as $1,000 or $2,000. "What we know is that people have always found ways around travel and they have found people in Australia who are willing to do it," she said. Olayide Ogunsiji, a senior lecturer at the Western Sydney University school of nursing and midwifery, said she had not heard of any rise in FGM cases here, but was concerned that could be due to a lack of reporting.  Dr Ounsiji feared lockdowns would enable parents to pressure their daughters into undergoing FGM, adding she was concerned about the broader impact of the pandemic on sexual and reproductive health in Australia's migrant and refugee communities. "It's about raising more awareness in this particular time of lockdown that there will be many girls and women that will be trapped into giving their consent to have it done," she said.  The projected global increase, she said, was "shocking, but not surprising".  "The reason I say it's not surprising is because of the closed-door secrecy that surrounds the practice itself," she said.  Khadija Gbla's repressed memory of female genital mutilation would surface during puberty. Being an outsider to a 'clitero-centric' culture, was a decision made for her. Ms Gbla added that seeking help for women abroad at this time was made more difficult due to shutdowns, citing a case where a woman in Turkey had reached out to her  the woman had been subjected to FGM and the mutilation had made urinating and menstruating unbearably painful. That was three weeks ago and Ms Gbla said she has been unable to connect with medical services on the ground there. "There's always been a silence around it, given it's such a cultural practice, and then you add COVID-19 into the mix, so kids are not having access to services  shelter and support," she said. "We are sitting ducks with our hands tied, waiting to deal with the carnage post-COVID, when the restrictions are lifted. Because we will have a carnage on our hands." The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women Marise Payne has been approached for comment. 
A former White House butler who served 11 US presidents over more than five decades has died at the age of 91 from coronavirus. Wilson Roosevelt Jerman succumbed to COVID-19, prompting glowing tributes from former first families. More than 95,000 Americans have died from coronavirus since February, with more than 1.61 million confirmed cases across the US. Mr Jerman's career began in 1957 with the Dwight Eisenhower administration and ended under Barack Obama in 2012. He performed a variety of roles during 55 years at the White House, including cleaner, lift operator, butler and maitre d'. "With his kindness and care, Wilson Jerman helped make the White House a home for decades of first families, including ours," said former first lady Michelle Obama.  "His service to others  his willingness to go above and beyond for the country he loved and all those whose lives he touched  is a legacy worthy of his generous spirit." Mr Jerman was promoted from cleaner to butler during the presidency of John Kennedy when first lady Jackie Kennedy noticed his professionalism. "[Jackie Kennedy] was instrumental in ensuring that that happened," his granddaughter Jamila Garrett told Fox 5 in Washington. Former president George W Bush and first lady Laura Bush said that Mr Jerman was a "lovely man." "He was the first person we saw in the morning when we left the residence and the last person we saw each night when we returned," the Bushes said in a statement. Hillary Clinton remembered Mr Jerman as a White House employee who added a human touch to his daily duties. "Bill and I were saddened to hear of the passing of Wilson Roosevelt Jerman at the age of 91 from COVID-19," she tweeted. "Jerman served as a White House butler across 11 presidencies and made generations of first families feel at home, including ours." During more than half a century in the White House, Mr Jerman witnessed many changes in US race relations, culminating in Mr Obama becoming the first black president in 2008. Ohio State University's Koritha Mitchell, author of From Slave Cabins to the White House, said that Mr Jerman was seen as an important figure in the history of African Americans in US political life. "That must have felt like a victory," Ms Mitchell said of Mr Jerman's time in the Obama White House. When he left his position in 2012 at the age of 83, Mr Jerman was honoured by Mr Obama with a series of plaques, for each of the 11 presidents he had served. When Mr Jerman began his White House career in 1957, the first frisbee had just been sold in US stores, Robert Menzies was Australian Prime Minister and the Asian Flu pandemic was claiming over 150,000 lives worldwide. ABC/Wires 
During a frantic shift curating rapidly unfolding news on the coronavirus crisis, sourcing information for inquiring readers and dishing up some occasional light relief with an amusing GIF, ABC News blogger Sophie Meixner came across a particularly curly question. Barbara wanted to know if she could continue to employ her 'gorgeous pool boy'? "We get a lot of questions asking: 'Can I do [specific activity] in [specific state or territory]' but I wasn't expecting Barbara's particular conundrum," recalls Sophie Meixner. "I saw the comment come in and read it out loud to Simon Smale, who was blogging with me. "We both chuckled, I threw it in the blog along with a couple of lines and didn't think anything of it. "A few people posted the screenshot on Twitter and it escalated from there. "I give all credit to Barbara who asked the most perfect and hilarious question that I only supplemented with my response." While Meixner's deft handling brought some laughs (as well as clarifying whether tradespeople were allowed to visit homes) she and her fellow bloggers take great care to ensure they're striking the right tone, given the devastating scale and impact of COVID-19. "First and foremost, the vast majority of the blog is for posting breaking news and making the current situation clearer for our audience  though we do try to write it in a more conversational and accessible way than some other news stories," Meixner says. "With the more flippant parts of the coronavirus blog, like 'feuds' between bloggers, occasional GIFs, and funny audience questions, I have certainly grappled with making sure I don't ever lose sense of the gravity of the situation and the fact that many people are deeply affected. "That said, the clear majority of our commenters indicate to us that we are striking the right balance between news coverage and the occasional moment of levity, reminding them there can still be humour and silliness in the world." Live blogs are usually launched around big breaking news events to provide rolling coverage of an unfolding story and compliment more traditional news articles, explainers and analysis, but they've also been an important part of ABC News coverage of elections, sport and big entertainment events, such as the Oscars and Eurovision. "Blogging allows us to get the key points to the audience as things happen, in real time," says Simon Smale. "I've been involved in blogging the summer bushfires, Queensland floods and the Christchurch massacre. "It's obvious that those events require a very different style of blogging, where we deliver concise, clear information in a sensitive way. "Meanwhile, when I've been covering Test cricket with the sport team, the coverage tends to be much more frivolous, with GIFS, jokes and a really large amount of audience interaction. "With the coronavirus blog, I've found that the tone that works best is somewhere between the two, a happy medium between delivering the news and keeping things entertaining." The audience interaction in a blog also helps inform how a story or news event is covered. "The added bonus of a live blog is that it gives us an opportunity to see what people are asking about that topic in real time and, particularly during coronavirus, gives us an opportunity to help people find out information," Smale says. "We're able to have those two-way discussions with readers and, to an extent, let them drive the coverage." "Blog readers are necessarily very switched on to the news because they are already across the broad picture and are coming to the blog for minute-by-minute updates," Meixner says. "In that way they often give us insightful and very funny commentary, as well as ask really challenging questions that are well-informed by context and often that nobody else has considered. "So, audience interaction truly enhances the quality of the blog. "There are two moments that stand out to me. "The first was on March 13 when the Government raised the SmartTraveller alert for the whole world to a Level 3 'do not travel'. "The second was on March 29 when Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced the 10-person gathering rule was being cut to a two-person rule. "Both of those moments felt so surreal for me and it was the questions to the blog that made me realise exactly how much each announcement would impact on people's daily lives. "We were able to form a list of common audience questions and seek answers both for blog posts and future stories and in that way, the audience interaction on the blog really shaped our coverage." The coronavirus blog is one of ABC News's longest-running live blogs, clocking up 70 days in a row (at time of writing) since March 14 and sometimes open from 5am to past midnight on a day with lots of developments. There are often two bloggers rostered on at the same time  one focused on breaking news while the other answers audience questions. "It's always a bit of a juggling act with the blog," Meixner says. "If it's a day when the National Cabinet is due to meet we know ahead of time that it's going to be a big one  not only for breaking news, but also in the hours following the press conference when people are going to be looking to the website for an explanation of the announcements made and how they will affect their lives. "But then some days we expect it's going to be quieter and then something huge happens nationally or internationally. "The resources I'm constantly monitoring throughout the shift  aside from questions coming into the blog  are the international and Australian wire services, Twitter and email, the Just In feed on the ABC News website, the ABC News Channel on TV and a service that transcribes it called Tveeder, a constantly updated domestic stats list we use internally, and each state or territory's health website and social media feeds. "From there, information just comes at us and it's our job to present it in a prioritised and coherent way." The bloggers regularly receive more than 300 questions per shift  on the busiest days when wide-ranging restrictions were announced the number topped 1,000  and do their best to answer as many as possible. "Another funny question I had was a woman who asked whether social distancing restrictions allowed her to still have sex," Meixner says. "I answered it in a way I thought was reasonable and in line with government advice (so far as it had been given). "As a 20-something, I had a lot of friends message me after that post saying they were wondering the exact same thing. "It highlighted how surreal this entire situation is and how many aspects of life have been affected." Meixner said some distressing questions and comments have stayed with her, often from people kept apart from loved ones. "A boyfriend and girlfriend who desperately wanted to see each other but don't live together and decided to stay apart for the noble sake of flattening the curve," she said. "A grandma who is used to seeing her grandkids multiple times a week and now hasn't seen them for more than a month. "A woman struggling with her mental health who's not able to drive interstate to stay with her sister, who wants to care for her." As well as asking questions about the pandemic, the audience has become curious about the bloggers themselves and possible tension in the ranks! "In the early days of this blogging marathon, a few audience members speculated that there might be rivalries on the blog, or a so-called blogging beef," Smale says. "We got so many questions asking why Bridget (Judd) and I didn't get on (we do  I think!) or who each blogger had an issue with. "The great thing about this blog is that there have been about eight different people running it, all with different personalities and styles, which really come out over the course of a seven-and-a-half-hour shift. "I think the audience appreciates that we have different styles  and they clearly have their favourites (Bridget and Sophie being the two people we get asked about a lot). "The interaction we do get with the audience is overwhelmingly positive. "People often just leave a comment saying hi or good morning (or to ask where Sophie or Bridget are) as well as questions about what's going on in the office. "I really enjoy getting comments that I can reply to in a funny way, particularly if people have picked up a thread from a previous day." Some regular commenters even say they don't know where they'll get their fix of drama once the blog stops, and with it the blogging beef. "I hate to spoil people's blogging enjoyment but none of us are feuding with each other and in fact we work in a fairly uneventful, harmonious office," Meixner says. "But on the blog, we have fallen into these fictional alliances which are just too entertaining not to continue. "According to the blog canon, Simon and Bridget are in an active feud, and Peter (Marsh) and I also have beef." And while the audience familiarity has made for engaging and entertaining reading it's been a weird experience for the bloggers. "It's truly odd and often very flattering," Meixner says. "There are people who comment under the name #1 Sophie Fan or Team Sophie. "The blog readers are avid and intelligent news consumers whose insights I really respect. "We online journos definitely aren't like the personalities you sometimes encounter on TV and radio, we're more bookish and less extroverted. "I'm quite happy to go back to being a more-or-less-faceless ABC reporter after this." While the blog style mightn't be everyone's cup of tea, it's attracted a strong audience with more than 42 million page views.  Helping people make sense of a difficult, stressful and uncertain time  and sometimes putting a smile on their face  has been hugely rewarding for the bloggers. "One thing I enjoy most is answering a question for someone who is clearly confused, or just plain concerned about a particular topic, and being able to point them in the direction of an article that one of our journalists has written on that topic," Smale says. "When the person gets back to you and says how helpful that was, that's a good feeling." "Blogging doesn't work for everyone, but it has worked for a lot of people during the coronavirus pandemic," Meixner says. "It certainly doesn't replace the more traditional forms of journalism, which I also love doing, but simply enhances them. "It's a platform we are constantly refining, but I believe it has provided information, clarity and even hope to many Australians as we all go through this surreal event together." Read more stories about how we produce the news on ABC Backstory. 
The US President claims he's been taking a controversial, unproven, potentially dangerous drug in an attempt to ward off the coronavirus. The President threatens to "hold up" federal funding for a state that's suffering a massive flood, all because it sent out applications for mail-in voting to reduce exposure to coronavirus. The President calls a Chinese Government spokesman a "dope" and a "wacko" at a time of near unprecedented tensions between the world's two superpowers. The President's son posts an Instagram meme that suggests Donald Trump's political opponent is a paedophile. A week is a long time for a reporter covering the Trump administration. Distractions and outrage are the only constants, even (or especially) during a pandemic. But here's a thing that may have slipped your attention: Trump has purged five internal watchdogs in the space of six weeks. It's hard to think of a time in living memory when independent oversight was more important for America. Impropriety and incompetence are everywhere you look. The Trump administration and state governors are under intense scrutiny over their failure to act swiftly and effectively during the crucial early stages of the pandemic, which modelling suggests cost at least 36,000 lives. To cope with the economic collapse, the Federal Government has already borrowed $US3 trillion ($4.5 trillion) from the nation's children and grandchildren, with more eye-popping stimulus on the way. And already there have been problems. At least $US1.5 billion, intended to help small businesses struggling with the coronavirus, was snaffled up by publicly listed companies, which were given preferential treatment to apply by banks which collected larger processing fees as a result. And then there's the seizure of Republican Senate intelligence committee chair Richard Burr's phone in an FBI investigation into his dumping of $US1.7 million worth of stocks before the markets tumbled. Fury over a $US700 billion taxpayer bailout for "too-big-to-fail" companies after the 2008 financial crisis, which funded lavish bonuses for bankers and traders, helped spawn the Tea Party movement, which in part led to Trump's election. Who knows where this latest, much bigger, round of murky stimulus will lead in the years to come. Right now, we don't even have a good mechanism for understanding whether fraud is being committed on a grand scale. As part of the latest stimulus legislation, an oversight board was established with broad scope to sniff out "fraud, waste, abuse and mismanagement". Named the Pandemic Response Accountability Committee (PRAC), its membership includes inspectors-general, who were tasked with alerting the public about anything improper in the public health and economic response to the crisis. In the past few weeks, three of the committee's watchdogs have been fired: Mitch Behm from the Transportation Department, Christi Grimm of the Department of Health and Human Services and the Pentagon's Glenn Fine. Behm was investigating a possible conflict of interest; Grimm had reported severe shortages of medical supplies in hospitals; Fine was heading the group overseeing the massive stimulus package. Trump claimed he had to act after receiving "reports of bias". "We have a lot of IGs from the Obama era," he said on Tuesday. Former Justice Department inspector-general Michael Bromwich told Reuters it was akin to "a reign of terror" unleashed on the IG community at a time when they're more needed than ever. "That is bad for everyone, but it's worse for the public," he said. And yet, the sacking of these three inspectors-general are not even the most controversial. State Department inspector-general Steve Linick had been investigating several matters involving the department head, Mike Pompeo. The Secretary of State had been accused of misusing taxpayer-funded staff by directing them to pick up his dry-cleaning and walk the family dog, Sherman. It's a relatively trivial, but potentially embarrassing, allegation. But Linick was also looking into a much more serious matter: whether the Trump administration had unlawfully declared an "emergency" last year that enabled Pompeo to bypass a congressional ban on selling weapons to Saudi Arabia. The declaration was made in the aftermath of the murder of journalist Jamal Khashoggi at a time when Riyadh was dropping American bombs on Yemen, contributing greatly to the world's worst humanitarian crisis. Trump claimed he'd never even heard of the inspector-general. So why did he sack him? "I was asked to by the State Department, by Mike [Pompeo]," he said when pressed this week. The Secretary of State, under investigation on several fronts, simply asked the President to sack the man leading the inquiries and it was done. Pompeo has said he didn't know he was under investigation, claiming Linick had to go because he wasn't "performing a function" that was "additive" to the state department. Others claim it was because of unauthorised disclosures, or leaks. The fact that the fifth sacking, a few weeks ago, surprised no-one, doesn't make it any less disturbing. Michael Atkinson was the intelligence community inspector-general who lit the spark that ended in the President's impeachment and ultimate acquittal in the Senate. Atkinson was just carrying out his duty, as the law required, to report the Ukraine whistleblower complaint to congress. Trump saw it as unacceptable disloyalty. Only one Republican has spoken out strongly against the President's purge. He's the same sole Republican who voted in favour of impeaching Trump. "The firings of multiple inspectors-general is unprecedented; doing so without good cause chills the independence essential to their purpose," wrote senator Mitt Romney on Twitter. "It is a threat to accountable democracy and a fissure in the constitutional balance of power." The President has every right to remove an inspector-general for any reason whatsoever. No doubt, there may be some bias among the crop appointed by Barack Obama. But presidents usually grit their teeth and bear it, in the knowledge that every administration will cop criticism in the name of accountability, with voters making the final call. In 1981, president Ronald Reagan moved to fire IGs installed by his Democratic predecessor Jimmy Carter, but a political uproar forced him to rehire several of them. Obama fired one IG to great bipartisan backlash, and he never tried it again. We're so immune to the constant uproar under Trump, this "scandal" was easy to miss. But it represents yet another brutal assault on the checks and balances that have helped keep the US Government accountable to its employer: the taxpayer. There will be a time when Trump is no longer president. But his legacy is already carved in stone. It'll take a bold, scrupulous and popular president to resist copying the Trump playbook to avoid hard-edged scrutiny. 
Watching China slap an 80 per cent tariff on Australian barley this week has made West Australian farmers nervous about whether there is more trade pain to come, according to WA Farmers Federation chief executive Trevor Whittington. "Grains, wool, wine, horticulture, the seafood industry  there's a lot of talk around peak bodies and with producers over what's happened with barley and what potentially is on the horizon," he said. Mr Whittington is also the president of Wines Western Australia, an industry caught up in another Chinese trade stoush 18 months ago. "We've seen this behaviour by China before," he said. "This is probably the new norm in how China will react when it's under pressure for whatever reason, and it'll simply ignore existing trade agreements and good protocols and lean on its importers and speed up or slow down trade activity." Mr Whittington said China's barley tariff was not in the spirit of the China Australia Free Trade Agreement, which came into force in December 2015. "I think China is certainly doing itself a disservice by signing these sorts of agreements and not just with Australia, with many other countries and regions around the world and then blatantly ignoring them," he said. "So how this possibly helps China in the long term, it's only a question that they can answer. "But the [agriculture] industry will get on with it and identify other markets and spread its risk." University of Western Australia China expert Jie Chen said Australia's actions would influence whether there were more tariffs to come. "All cards are on the table," he said. "It depends on how Australia conducts itself in the next step in relation to the so-called independent inquiry into coronavirus to be led by the World Health Organisation, and how China will see Australia behave in this international investigation. "Particularly how Australia will collaborate with the United States in pursuing China in relation to the investigation. "I would say both sides have some room to manoeuvre." Dr Chen believed China's decision to impose the barley tariff amid Australia's calls for an independent inquiry into COVID-19 fit a familiar pattern of behaviour. "That China can penalise, can punish you and it can also reward you," he said. In particular, he cited China's 2010 decision to impose import controls on Norwegian salmon in apparent retribution for the Nobel Peace Prize being awarded in Oslo to the Chinese dissident, Liu Xiaobo. Eventually, diplomatic relations between the two countries thawed. Federal Agriculture Minister David Littleproud has already made it clear there would be no retaliation and Australia and China were not engaged in a "trade war". Independent WA-based China researcher Wai Ling Yeung believed China's tariff imposition had a lot to do with how it wanted its own people to see it. "The diplomats from China have been behaving in quite a strange way, I have to say, and there's a name that's been given to that called the 'wolf warrior diplomats'," she said. "Beijing is very eager to control the dialogue and rhetoric that's been going on worldwide concerning the COVID-19 [pandemic]. "From Beijing's point of view, that will have an impact on the governance of the Chinese government and also the sustainability of the Communist Party's governance as well." But Ms Yeung also believed the Federal Government's rejection of China's overtures to join its global infrastructure initiative, the Belt and Road project, was a factor. "Some of the Chinese diplomats in Australia were getting a bit nervous and stressed by the fact that even after trying very, very hard they only managed to get Victoria to promise to sign up," she said. 
Coronavirus restrictions in South Australia are easing from today and people are feeling more comfortable venturing out of their homes  but instead of celebrations, the changes are causing widespread confusion. Restaurants and cafes can expand their service from today to include indoor dining. While a big topic for many is when they can go to the pub for a drink, it turns out that's not an easy question to answer. Small bars  or at least those with small venue licences  will still not be able to open until June 5 either, despite many not looking that different to restaurants. The confusion has cost Adelaide city wine bar East End Cellars about $5,000, after its operators mistakenly thought it could reopen today under the easing of COVID19 restrictions. East End Cellars had brought in food supplies, printed new menus and extensively cleaned its toilets ahead of a planned relaunch. However, owner Michael Andrewartha said an early morning call from the licensing commissioner changed those plans. "The fine line is that we are a bar, even though there's no bar here or a bar licence, so we had to not open today, which is disappointing for everyone," Mr Andrewartha said. Premier Steven Marshall said the State Government wanted to limit the total number of people flocking back to eat and drink out, as well as the number or patrons in individual venues. "It is confusing and we acknowledge that," he said. "We apologise for that confusion but what we're trying to do is lift the restrictions in an orderly way and keep the coronavirus at bay." Consumer and Business Services said it would let individual venues know they could be in breach of the rules if they were "opening in the mistaken belief they are able to open". Pubs originally intended to reopen indoor dining on Monday, June 8  but health authorities have brought that forward to June 5 so hoteliers can capitalise on the Queen's Birthday long weekend trade.  That is a "common sense" decision, according to Ian Horne from the state branch of the Australian Hotels Association. "It would have been nonsense to start reforms on the last day of a long weekend, so thankfully they've recognised common sense should prevail," he said. The short answer is: we don't know yet. How things will look when pubs and licensed venues reopen on June 5 is not absolutely clear. SA Police Commissioner Grant Stevens said authorities were taking a "principled approach" to restrictions  meaning it won't be a one-size-fits-all ruling.  "Instead of having a blanket rule for every business in South Australia we'll be developing protocols that businesses will have to adopt," he said. "That will enable them to take full advantage of the economic benefits of reopening their businesses." That decision is a relief for some business owners, particularly those with larger venues.  It means that, rather than the previous ruling of only 20 patrons inside, a larger pub with multiple dining areas could be allowed to cater to more people given the bigger floorspace that will allow for social distancing to occur. Going to the pub for a sit-down meal will be allowed from June 5, but depending on the size and layout, the owners will need to consider their obligations once further details are released.  If they deem it to be viable, and they choose to open, patrons should be able to head to their local on June 5 to enjoy a meal with friends. Determining when you can go back just for a drink in the bar is more uncertain  at this stage it looks like only seated dining and drinking will be allowed. "In the first instance we're talking about seated dining within the pubs, but we'll get all of those guidelines," Mr Marshall said.  Some pub owners are disappointed with the news, particularly those who don't serve food, like the Wheatsheaf Hotel in Thebarton. "It won't be viable for us to open under those conditions," said Wheatsheaf owner Jade Flavell.  Restaurants and cafes can now serve 10 people for outdoor dining and 10 people for indoor dining, and the rules have changed to allow the service of alcohol. So, those who have been looking forward to supporting their favourite restaurants  and they've chosen to open  can go as early as today. Police will also resume stationery drug and alcohol testing this weekend. Even though mobile random breath tests have been in operation the whole time, officers are expected to be out in force.  Wallis Cinemas' drive-in cinema at Gepps Cross will reopen next Friday, June 29, but other cinemas will have to wait until June 5. Those wanting to work out at the gym will also have to wait a little longer  but can return from June 5 in some capacity. The guidelines are still being drafted, but you should be prepared to clean equipment before and after use and there may also be restrictions on the number of people allowed in at any one time, depending on the size of the facility.  People wanting to attend indoor exercise classes may also be able to go back from June 5  but, again, details on how it will work are yet to be provided. Some operators may decide it's not viable to start back up if they have to reduce class sizes by too much to allow for social distancing. June 5 is also when beauty and nail salons, massage parlours and tattoo shops can all open, but more details are expected on how many people can be inside at any one time.  You might not get an appointment straight away if the operators can only have limited people inside, and there may be a back log of customers to clear. Spas and saunas remain closed as authorities say there's a higher risk of transmission in those sorts of places. Activities that involve larger gatherings  such as going to the football or a nightclub or food court  will not be resuming any time soon. 
Victoria has recorded another 12 coronavirus infections, including five linked to an outbreak at the Cedar Meats abattoir. It brings the number of cases linked to the abattoir in Brooklyn, in Melbourne's west, to 111 including 67 staff and 44 close contacts. The rise in cases means Victoria has been responsible for the majority of Australia's reported cases during the past week  53 of 73 cases reported by Friday morning.  Four of the new diagnoses were detected in hotel quarantine and two through community screening programs. The other case is still under investigation. There are 93 active coronavirus cases recorded in Victoria, with 10 people in hospital, including five in intensive care units. The State Opposition said it was increasingly concerned about the growing cluster of cases linked to Cedar Meats and continued to push for an independent investigation. "This cluster gets worse and worse every day," Opposition Leader Michael O'Brien said. While Health Minister Jenny Mikakos earlier said it had been handled "absolutely perfectly", Mr O'Brien said "111 infected people tells you this has been a shambles". Education Minister James Merlino said about 10,000 school staff had been tested as the state prepares to resume face-to-face teaching on Tuesday. "I'm just so pleased that around 10,000 education staff so far have gone and got tested and not one has come back with a positive result," he said. Mr Merlino said health authorities had identified 171 infections which could indicate community transmission, an increase of three since Thursday, out of a total 1,593 positive COVID-19 cases in Victoria. Meanwhile, Victoria Police issued only eight fines to people breaching coronavirus restrictions since 11:00 pm on Sunday, after conducting 3,839 spot checks on homes, businesses and non-essential services. There are only five reasons to leave your home in Victoria  shopping for things you need, accessing medical services or caregiving, attending work or education that cannot be done from home, exercise and some recreational activities, and visiting family and friends. Up to five visitors are allowed at your home and gatherings of up to 10 are allowed outdoors in public for non-contact sport and recreation, but you must maintain 1.5 metres between yourself and others. The State Opposition has criticised the Government's decision toslowlyeaserestrictions, as other states push ahead with opening restaurants and relaxing travel rules. The Melbourne Cricket Club (MCC) has announced it will offer a 30 per cent discount for members, with the president conceding it was "unlikely" fans would be able to watch AFL matches during the 2020 season. The club has about 130,000 members and a further 215,000 on waiting lists, with annual fees for metropolitan-based adults ranging between $360 to $715. Updated Sunday, May 24 Membership grants fans automatic access to most AFL and cricket games at the MCG, as well as a seat in the members' stand. "Our revenue model is dramatically compromised as a result of the crisis and the revenue from managing the ground will not return in any significant form until crowds at games can return," MCC president Michael Happell said. The 30 per cent discount will apply to the club's upcoming 2020/21 season, which begins on September 1. Further discounts would be offered to members who could show they had suffered financial hardship, Mr Happell said. The decision comes as some AFL clubs and Adelaide Oval members have been offered full refunds on 2020 memberships, with the Australian Competition and Consumer Commissionsaying it will "monitor issues relating to sport club membership refunds, credits and ongoing charges". Speaking on ABC Radio Melbourne, MCC chief executive Stuart Fox said the reaction from members to the proposal had been "overwhelmingly positive". While many regard the club and its Members Pavillion as the posh section of the MCG, Mr Fox dismissed suggestions they were "elitist". "They're hard-working Australians, who have joined the club because they love sport," he said. "They're the same as AFL members. They're the same as sporting club members." "Anyone can join the Melbourne Cricket Club. You can put your name down at birth. We don't discriminate, it's access for all. I think it's factually incorrect to call us elitist in any way." The AFL season is set to resume on June 11, however fans will not be permitted at games for the foreseeable future. 
Tasmanian scientists are collecting data on Hobart's air quality using the CSIRO's research vessel Investigator while the ship is stuck in port due to the coronavirus restrictions. RV Investigator  which has atmospheric instruments to monitor emissions and pollutants  was forced to suspend its operations in March and cancelled five voyages out to sea. CSIRO research scientist Melita Keywood said the instruments were currently running to measure air quality in the Hobart region.  "Wherever the Investigator goes, we can make measurements of the atmosphere, measurements for particles, natural gases and greenhouse gases," she said.  "In Hobart, there are EPA stations that are measuring air quality data to make sure we have good air quality so everyone's health is protected. "There are some gases that we are measuring on the ship that are different from what are usually measured in an air quality station, like carbon dioxide." Ms Keywood said some of the data, such as the presence of gases like ozone, had not been collected in more than 20 years. "That is an air pollutant and is of concern to human health but it's not been measured since the 1990s," she said.  "From the preliminary data, the concentrations are still very low. Particles are bad for human health, but they're not just one thing.  "There are lots of different chemicals and there are lots of different sizes. So we are measuring the size of the particles and the number of small particles." CSIRO technical officer Ian McRobert said having the Investigator docked in Hobart was a unique opportunity.  "The information collected by our instruments tells us about the pollution levels within Hobart and when we're at sea it gives us great background data on global climate," he said.  "We're collecting data on the Hobart air quality throughout the winter and this will contribute to a national study on ultra-fine particle pollution and will also tell us about the profile of pollution created in Hobart during the winter.  Mr McRobert said the pollution within Hobart affected people's health and "there's not great information out there on what those pollution levels are". Science operations manager at the Marine National Facility Matthew Kimber said coronavirus had had a massive impact on the CSIRO and RV Investigator.  "Getting the science party, the researchers from all over the world onto the ship is a really challenging situation with the restrictions in place," he said.  "The other big issue, and as we've seen with cruise ships, is ships in general are really difficult places to manage with the coronavirus. "There's no doubt that we are really going to have to think about how we conduct operations for the foreseeable future." 
Hours before doctors diagnosed 15-month-old Ingrid Newman with a life-threatening brain tumour, her mother agonised over whether to take the toddler to hospital. The pair had travelled from Cooktown to Cairns for medical tests when the toddler suddenly stopped walking early last month.  But when the tests were complete, they had to quarantine for two weeks under police and military guard before they could return home.  The rules apply to anyone wishing to enter Cape York under Federal Government legislation designed to protect vulnerable communities from COVID-19.  Ingrid and her mother, Belle Newman, were 10 days into their quarantine period when the toddler had a sudden violent seizure and started frothing at the mouth.  Ms Newman called a nurse straight away, but said she agonised over whether to break quarantine and send her daughter to hospital.  "I am really glad we did go because otherwise we wouldn't have known about this tumour and it could have gotten much worse," she said.  The family is now in Brisbane, where Ingrid is about to start chemotherapy at the Queensland Children's Hospital.  But the frightening experience has sparked fear other Cape York patients may delay seeking urgent medical help because they don't want to break isolation rules in place under the Biosecurity Act.  "I definitely do believe there are some people that would be putting it off and thinking it might just go away instead of getting help ... because they don't want to be stuck," Ms Newman said.  "I was very reluctant to have to start the two weeks quarantine again."  A Queensland Health spokesman said all public patients, carers and families were screened before going into quarantine to ensure they were fit and ready to complete the two weeks. "We have medical staff available from 8:00am to 10:00pm daily to respond to any medical episodes that might be suffered during quarantine," he said.  "If anyone requires any medical care they will receive it immediately." The spokesman said quarantine requirements were in place to protect First Nations communities from COVID-19.  Since the legislation passed in late March, more than 150 people have completed quarantine in government-funded accommodation in Cairns and returned to their communities on Cape York.  A further 160 are currently undergoing the process.  Ms Newman said being stuck in a hotel apartment with her toddler, unable to go outside, had been extremely difficult.  "One of the things we do to calm my daughter down when she's having a meltdown is we go outside and touch the trees," she said.  "I just couldn't do that, and of course she was being very agitated by this thing growing in her head." Other families have spoken about the mental health implications of having to quarantine in hotel apartments after childbirth. They've asked to be allowed to fly home and quarantine for two weeks when there.  A Queensland Health spokesman asked for understanding from patients and their families during "exceptional times".  "We regret any temporary and short-term inconvenience experienced by individuals and families required to comply with mandatory Commonwealth biosecurity quarantine requirements prior to returning to their Cape York or Torres Strait communities," he said.  "All people undergoing quarantine ... are accommodated in fully serviced apartments with individual kitchens and other facilities.  "They receive meals delivered to their doors three times a day and can also order additional items though reception. "They are also able to order in Uber eats, have supermarket deliveries made, or have friends and family members drop off supplies and other items for them if required.  "We recognise the concerns of patients and their families about the process, but we ask for their understanding on the need to manage their return safely and with the minimum of risk to their communities." Next week, 15-month-old Ingrid will start six weeks of chemotherapy to reduce the size of her brain tumour so that it can be removed.  Ms Newman, who's 26 weeks' pregnant with her second child, said she was grateful for the support she'd received from Queensland Health.  "In a way it was good we were in Cairns (and not Cooktown), because the help was on our doorstep," she said.  A shunt in Ingrid's head is now relieving pressure from the tumour. "It's been very overwhelming but she's such a little fighter," Ms Newman said.  "She's starting to be able to walk again and move around without any pain, and she's back to her normal, happy, cheeky self. "How she's been improving since they put the shunt in is giving us all a lot of hope." 
The NSW coronavirus death toll has climbed to 50 following the death of an 80-year-old Sydney woman, bringing Australia's total to 101. NSW chief health officer Kerry Chant said the woman died from the virus last night in Sydney's Concord Hospital. Dr Chant said the woman was exposed to the virus when she attended an outpatient clinic at the hospital but there was no ongoing risk of transmission at the facility. There were three new coronavirus infections in the state yesterday, bringing the state's total to 3,084. All three cases are still under investigation but health authorities said they were not linked and were working to determine if they had been acquired in three different areas of Sydney. A total of 8,611 people were tested for COVID-19 in the 24 hours to 8:00pm yesterday. Dr Chant said the state had a high rate of testing, with more than 400,000 people swabbed since the pandemic began. "One negative test does not mean you are not going to get COVID-19," she said. She urged people to get tested multiple times, if they felt unwell. "We are going to need you to re-engage with testing ... every time you have new respiratory symptoms, you do need another test," she said. "That's particularly important as we come through to the winter season where we might see an upswing in other respiratory infections." Dr Chant also emphasised there was no room for delays in coming forward for testing and people shouldn't take the approach of "oh I'll just see how my sore throat develops". 
The phones are ringing hot at popular Melbourne restaurants, pubs and cafes, as eager customers try to book the first available tables when Victoria's coronavirus restrictions ease on June 1. Hospitality venues were forced to close their doors or operate as takeaway businesses in March but, under the new rules, will be able to cater for up to 20 customers at a time. Ben Anderson, the Victorian manager of the Australian Venue Company, said all 31 of its businesses would reopen on June 1 although bookings would be limited to two-hour sessions. "People are trying to ring for groups of 10 or 20. We're getting lots of calls through our reservations line," he said. A similar rush also occurred in Sydney this month when restrictions were eased in NSW, with some restaurants reportedly booked out in an hour. Staff at the Auburn Hotel in Melbourne's inner east have been spending the week setting up equipment, furniture and glassware ahead of the long-awaited return of customers on June 1. With the venue normally popular throughout the week, manager Heather Eiswirth said calls began flooding in when the State Government flagged the reopening of restaurants on May 17. "As soon as the Government eased the restrictions we immediately got phone calls for people to book," she said. "I think everyone misses the pub environment." As stipulated by state regulations, every customer's name, contact number, and address will be recorded on a database that could be accessed by health authorities. Due to the reduced capacity, South Melbourne cafe St Ali will use black theatre curtains to artificially shrink its venue to give customers the impression that things are busy inside. Owner Salvatore Malatesta said he had received "over 100 inquiries" from people wanting to book tables. "We've got regulars who've been coming for 15 years. A dozen or slightly more come every day, seven days a week at the same time. Those guys are texting me saying 'Make sure my table is available'," Mr Malatesta said. While he was pleased to be reopening his doors, Mr Malatesta was concerned many hospitality businesses would struggle to stay afloat when the Federal Government's JopKeeper payments end in October. "I'm remaining pretty positive because the alternative is terminal," he said. "There is no other description other than to say the pandemic has decimated hospitality." The Victorian Government released some details of its plan to gradually reopen venues on May 17, and is due to announce more specifics about the rules on Monday. From June 1, up to 20 patrons will be allowed in an "enclosed space" provided venues can ensure there is enough space for one person per four square metres. The Government hopes to be able to allow up to 50 patrons from June 22, with up to 100 permitted during the second half of July. "Increased hygiene measures" for staff and patrons will also be required. Food critic and writer Dani Valent said there was also confusion in the industry about a condition that stated alcohol could only be served with a "genuine meal". Exactly what a genuine meal was  and whether it included smaller dishes like tapas, dumplings and bowls of chips  remained unclear. "It's going to be a mad scramble between May 25 and June 1 to get up to speed," she said. "It's also not clear what an enclosed space is and we don't know about outdoor areas." Ms Eiswirth agreed, and hoped the rules would allow larger venues like hers to be sectioned off into several enclosed spaces so they could operate with a higher capacity. Victoria Police will conduct checks to ensure compliance, and they will have the power to issue on-the-spot fines of up to $9,913 for breaches. The co-owner of CBD Italian restaurant Tipo 00, Andrea Papadakis, said he was "excited" to be reopening his doors on June 1, but said he would not be taking bookings for the time being. The restaurant's takeaway service would also continue when dining resumed. "We don't want to create queues," Mr Papadakis said. "I don't think it'll be as hectic as many people think. People are still happy to stay back and see what's going to happen. "We'll try to break even at the moment but it will be great for our staff. "It will open up more shifts for our staff who have been waiting at home." 
As COVID-19 lockdowns are gradually lifted across the nation, Australians are enthusiastically resuming many of their favourite hobbies. But for seniors, statistically considered more vulnerable to coronavirus, easing into the "new normal" comes with added risk. Five seniors spoke to the ABC about their feelings as restrictions lift, pubs fill with patrons and swimming pools reopen. At 90, Nita McAuley has been delighted to rejoin her Darwin Stingers Masters Swimming Club mates when they resumed training at the Parap Pool this week, but she could have waited longer. "I think we should have stayed locked down a bit longer and made sure that we're all well, but people get impatient. I'm not impatient, I can't afford to be," she said. Ms McAuley doesn't feel the need to limit her movement or activities but says that's only because people arriving in the NT still have to quarantine for two weeks in a hotel. "We're very lucky to be in Darwin, we haven't experienced all the terrible things that are happening down south, and I think we should keep it that way a bit longer until we're sure of what's happening in other states," she said. But other club members including Anne Walker said they would keep self-imposing limits on how many people they gathered with and how they moved about, beyond the official rules. "I won't be getting into any large groups any time soon, I am only mixing with three or four people," she said. Ms Walker also said her feeling of relative safety would disappear if the Territory's border restrictions were removed while there was still community transmission of COVID-19 in other states. On Darwin's Fannie Bay bowling green, Christine Paynter is relishing being able to gather with the members of her seniors team now the lockdown has been lifted. "I didn't like it at all because I'm a social butterfly, I like to be out and about and I've missed my bowls really badly," she said. The retired nurse said she was happy to move freely around Darwin as long as the Territory's border quarantine rules remained.  During the lockdown, she had to remain out in the community, doing essential shopping for her daughter's family, who quarantined at home for two weeks after her baby grandson came home from emergency surgery in Brisbane. "That was pretty traumatic. I just had to hand the shopping over the fence, so I also isolated myself as much as I could," she said. Larrakia elder and community leader Kathy Mills, 84, said what upset her most during the lockdown was feeling it wasn't safe to see her great-grandchildren at her home in Palmerston. "I'm very close to my grandchildren, and it has hurt me not to be with them, and then when they've come I've been nervous about touching them," she said. "It wasn't that I was scared about catching the virus, but because of my age and because I was vulnerable it made me feel worried that I might pass it on." Ms Mills hopes missing family and society has encouraged people to value those as much more important. Although she has cerebral palsy, Robyn Burridge said she hasn't felt more vulnerable than other people in the community, but she listened to medical friends who ordered her to stay at home as much as possible. She said she missed having friends to visit, as well as being able to attend a ceremony to receive an OAM for her disability sector advocacy work. But she has also found the pandemic "a great leveller". "It's been wonderful that everything has moved a lot slower, people have moved a lot slower," she said. "People avoid wheelchairs anyway, they stand away from them, so isolation wasn't a problem. Just generally I feel we've been much more easily accepted." Although she continued to shop for essentials during the lockdown, last week she made her first outing back to Darwin's foreshore in six weeks. "I didn't think freedom was so important but to just feel that lovely breeze going through your hair, and the cool crystal water, it was just absolutely beautiful," she said. She hopes that despite regaining freedom, the community will remember what it is like to move more slowly and reflect on how lucky the Territory has been to have so few virus cases. "It's not over yet, by a long shot, so we can't afford to be complacent. So I just hope that our borders stay shut for quite some time to come." 
On Monday, ACT police gave a press conference expressing their frustration at Canberra's recent driving record. There had been a significant spike in road-related incidents, including one in which two drivers were caught travelling at more than 150kph on Parkes Way and another in which a 19-year-old driver wedged their car into a Kambah home at 3:00am. Three major incidents occurred on Sunday and four on Monday in the space of an hour, Officer in Charge of Road Policing, Detective Station Sergeant Marcus Boorman said. Detective Boorman said police had been seeing the rate of driving offences go up with each passing day. "We're catching people speeding, drink driving, drug driving, using their phones, and ignoring red lights on a daily basis, yet every day we're catching more people doing it," he said. He said officers were baffled by the rapid rise, considering there were far fewer drivers on the road than there were before the pandemic brought society to a halt. Detective Boorman said ACT Policing's fear was that the risk-taking behaviour would only get worse, with fines and infringements currently not having their usual effect. "I really don't know where to start in relation to our frustration with what we're seeing out there," he said. "I don't know what's causing this driver behaviour, but I do know what the effect will be, someone's luck will run out and we'll have a person, or people killed." But among psychologists, there are a few reasons that spring to mind to account for the spike in risk-taking, and they are related to the devastating ripple-effect of COVID-19. Each of us has a level of risk with which we are generally comfortable, according to ANU Professor of Psychology Michael Smithson. And when some risk in our life is mitigated, it can be a natural response to then bring in new risks to essentially level things out. That could mean going for an unusually long run and then allowing oneself to eat a special treat later as a kind of reward, effectively levelling out the relationship between risk and safety we are taking with our health. In the case of people speeding or driving under the influence, Dr Smithson said there could be a correlation with the effects of social distancing rules. "They might in a sense feel constrained, or like their freedoms have been denied in one area, so they might be compensating for that," Dr Smithson said. Early data suggesting Australians were drinking more in social isolation also fitted with that idea, he said. "People are maintaining social distancing, staying at home and so on, and when people are behaving in a more morally upright and correct fashion than they're accustomed to, that gives them license to be a little more rotten at something else," Dr Smithson said. "So they'll say, 'maybe I'll have that extra glass of wine, maybe I'll binge watch that series', and that could explain some of that risky driving." ANU College of Law Associate Professor Kath Hall said while it was not possible to know for sure why there had been a spike in driving incidents, risk-taking was often associated with heightened stress in a person's life. She said it was likely the pandemic was taking an enormous toll on people's mental health, not just in terms of uncertainty around work and other significant factors, but also in the way it had confined them. "The more that people's stress levels increase, with thoughts of their health or death, the more prone we are to respond to those stresses with drinking or drug-taking," Dr Hall said. "I think it is interesting that these driving behaviours happened straight after social distancing restrictions." In the ACT, social distancing restrictions eased overnight on Friday, allowing 10 people to dine-in at a cafe or restaurant, while liberties were also extended in relation to public spaces. Saturday night was the first evening people might have felt some license to let loose a little since the pandemic began. "There are a couple of things going on when we have less control over our life, our movements, our decisions, so that where we can, we can try to claim back some control over the things we can do," Dr Hall said. She said the pandemic  bringing with it the threat of thousands of deaths and economic turmoil  could also have altered people's perceptions of what constituted a "serious risk". Speeding or driving under the influence could actually seem like a lesser crime than it would under normal circumstances, she said. In fact, the pandemic's death toll  and subsequent reporting of those statistics  could be having the opposite effect on people than what is intended. Researchers at the University of Stirling recently reported that there was evidence people became more comfortable with taking risks after hearing reports of high numbers of deaths. "The logic is that risk-taking can be a source of self-esteem and one common way of coping with the inescapable threat of death is to bolster our self-esteem," the researchers said. "In short, when you encounter news that hundreds of people, just like your neighbours, have died in the past day, there are consequences for your judgement and decision-making. "You are unlikely to be conscious of some of these consequences and, contrary to what the media and officials would wish, they might make you sensitive to the risks that we now face." But researchers said while people were perhaps having an adverse effect to bad news around the world, stories of heroism had another impact, encouraging people to think more positively. "Heroes typically embody the traits that we would like to see continue into future generations, and so relating thoughts of death to heroism can serve as a buffer against existential concerns," they wrote. The effects of coronavirus are only just starting to be collated and investigated by science, but there is strong evidence to suggest the pandemic is already having significant impacts on our behaviour. Without the luxury of time on their side, ACT Policing could only beg the public to use common sense as coronavirus restrictions ease and society begins to enjoy certain freedoms after months of confinement. 
Thousands of political delegates are gathering in Beijing for China's annual parliamentary-style political Congress  in a showcase the ruling Communist Party hopes will highlight a triumph over coronavirus.  The mass gathering is being portrayed in China as a display of the country's strength in largely containing the virus domestically. It's also a chance to reset the focus on reviving the world's second largest economy. But with more than 50 cases publicly reported in the past two days despite some of the world's toughest monitoring measures, authorities here are taking many measures to minimise the risk of President Xi Jinping being exposed to the virus. At the opening of a less important advisory meeting on Thursday, nearly everyone in the Great Hall of the People wore masks. But Mr Xi and the other members of the top Politburo Standing Committee didn't wear masks. Not all of the 3,000 delegates will be attending in person. Those that are there have had to undergo hotel quarantine. Diplomats that would usually observe the opening work report by Premier Li Keqiang are only permitted in the Great Hall if they undergo COVID testing and isolation at a state guesthouse. Many are therefore not attending, including Australia's Ambassador to China Graham Fletcher. Journalists  who have long faced access barriers to those in power in China  now have an extra layer of distance. While some will be allowed in after undergoing testing, the vast majority of reporters are barred from the Congress venue and are restricted to asking (often pre-selected) questions to delegates via video link from a media centre in a different part of Beijing. "The Congress has both a symbolic and practical significance this year", said Beijing-based independent political commentator Wu Qiang. "Authorities couldn't indefinitely postpone it as they need to show they won the battle against the virus over the past few months." The biggest change is that the normal 10-day program of provincial sessions and working groups has been whittled down to about a week. While the ceremony for the opening is likely to be dialled down in an emptier hall, there are many familiar aspects about this year's event. In the lead up, the usual small army of retirees appeared on the streets clad in red armbands. The neighbourhood watch volunteers are part of a heavy-handed security effort in central Beijing each year designed to ensure nothing goes wrong. "I think Chairman Xi's good health is our biggest wish  he's our leader and guides our country", said one of the retired volunteers who declined to give his name to the ABC. "He must not fall ill." While the Congress is widely viewed outside China as a rubber stamp parliament that approves decisions largely made by the Communist Party's leadership, it does set the economic agenda for the year ahead. Usually the second-ranked leader Premier Li Keqiang would announce a GDP growth target range to signal how much China's Government will spend. Last year, it was 6-6.5 per cent. This year, with China's economy suffering an unprecedented first quarter official growth rate of minus 6.8 per cent (and some analysts suspecting it was even worse), it's not clear if he will announce a target. "I don't think Premier Li will set up a definite GDP growth target for this year. It's not necessary", said Xiang Songzuo, an economics professor. "From my observation, in the second half of this year, China's economy will have a positive growth rate, maybe 3 to 4 per cent, and overall for 2020, maybe it will be 1 per cent or 2." Some others have suggested failing to declare a growth target would hurt confidence about China's ability to bounce back quickly from the crisis. Most commentators expect the government will use fiscal and monetary tools to try to get the economy chugging again, even though options are considerably more limited now than when Beijing spent $US575 billion ($873 billion) worth of stimulus during the 2008 Global Financial Crisis. Alleviating spiralling unemployment appears to be the main focus, with few factories in China's southern manufacturing heartland running at capacity amid an export slump. "I expect Premier Li to launch more infrastructure investments", said Professor Xiang. If so, it could reassure Australian coal and iron ore exporters  who are jittery over reports that some power plants have been ordered to suspend Australian coking coal imports to protect local producers. Revised iron ore inspection procedures have also raised concerns, having been announced just days after new barley tariffs and bans on some Australian beef imports  which Chinese authorities have only half-heartedly claimed are not linked to strained diplomatic ties. A China Iron Ore Association spokesman told the ABC the new customs inspection measures were aimed at streamlining imports, not holding them up. 
With all Queensland students returning to the classroom on Monday, the public transport network in the state's south-east is set to face a key coronavirus physical-distancing test. In New South Wales, the State Government announced maximum numbers of passengers on buses and trains. However, Queensland Transport Minister Mark Bailey said there was currently no need to introduce capacity limits and commuters needed to use "common sense". Mr Bailey said patronage on public transport had plummeted by 77 per cent during the pandemic, and even with school returning in full, social distancing was not a problem. "There is no issue at the moment in terms of social distancing  there is a lot of space there for people," Mr Bailey said. "[Quotas] is not something that we believe is necessary at this point, and the risk in Queensland is considerably lower than New South Wales where community transmission is much more common. "We're cognisant of the fact that when schools go back fully next week there will be an increase in passengers, but again, people are not going to just go back to how they worked before." University of Queensland virologist Ian Mackay said Queensland appeared to be keeping the situation under control, and while children could be infected with COVID-19, they seemed to be affected less severely. "The experiment goes on with us returning back to normal, as much as we can, while keeping that physical distance," Associate Professor Mackay said.  Patronage levels will be monitored.(Supplied: Queensland Government) Authorities said cleaning on public transport vehicles had increased in response to coronavirus. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Passengers are not allowed to use cash to buy a ticket and bus commuters must board via the rear door. "[We're also] ensuring [passengers] are aware of how to socially distance and those communications will increase in coming days," Mr Bailey said. Transport Workers Union (TWU) Queensland branch secretary Peter Biagini said the union would also like to see some seats blocked off to help ensure physical distancing. He said safe social distancing needed to be maintained on public transport, but drivers should not have to be the ones to enforce it. "Members of the public need to pitch in to ensure that there is social distancing happening on public transport  if we all do our bit we can come out of this stronger," he said. "We have been campaigning on having screens installed for the drivers for years to stop them being assaulted and spat on  if we had these in already then our members would be much more comfortable at work during this pandemic. "We will continue to push for 10 days of special pandemic leave for any driver who has been possibly exposed to COVID-19 so that they can self-isolate without worrying about paying the bills." Associate Professor Mackay said air-conditioning systems on public transport vehicles helped dilute any viruses and said he was not sure if limiting seats was necessary, given the position Queensland was in. Latest information from Queensland Health. But both Mr Bailey and Brisbane Lord Mayor Adrian Schrinner said patronage levels would be monitored. "If there are issues arising, that's something we're happy to have a look at," Cr Schrinner said. "Ultimately it does require people just to use a bit of common sense to make sure they are as safe as possible." Mr Bailey said extra train services could be added during shoulder peak hours to help give passengers more space. "It will be different to how it was before the pandemic and we'll be monitoring that closely and if we need to make adjustments to that, we will," he said. He said extra cleaning services had been brought on as a precaution. "We've had very strong measures in place since the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic  things like cashless ticketing, rear door boarding on our buses, tripling of cleaning on our trains and we've seen cleaning and hygiene routines right across our modes increase considerably." P&C Queensland chief executive Kevan Goodworth said catching public transport needed to be managed, but he had not heard of any complaints or concerns from parents on the issue. "I think this will come out in the wash next week when we see what happens," Mr Goodworth said. "We are encouraging parents to talk to the schools. "Schools are back on Monday and that's where [the students] need to be." 
Who'd be Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk right now? Facing a tough election in October, Palaszczuk is coming under huge pressure to open the state's borders, so visitors in search of winter sun can start to get the tourist industry back on its feet. She's in the sights not just of the Federal Government, with Peter Dutton ("a proud Queenslander") leading the charge, but of NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian as well. Ms Palaszczuk so far is holding firm, saying she'll follow the advice of her Chief Health Officer, Jeannette Young.  The border closure will be reviewed monthly; it could stay shut until September, and Dr Young says possibly even longer. It depends on the number of active cases in NSW and Victoria, which have far more than Queensland. It might be Queensland first opens up to South Australia and the Northern Territory before re-opening the border with NSW. In political terms, Ms Palaszczuk is on risky ground whatever she does. Depriving the state's economy of much-needed dollars will give ammunition to her opponents. On the other hand, if an open border led to a serious outbreak in a tourist centre, forcing fresh shutdowns, she'd carry the blame. It's a dilemma to which there is no "correct" answer. So far, Ms Palaszczuk has voters' support in how she's handled the pandemic (although her government's rating is lower than those of other state governments). In the Essential poll published this week, 66 per cent of Queenslanders answered good or very good when asked, "How would you rate your state government's response to the COVID-19 outbreak?" In WA, 86 per cent rated the McGowan Government's performance positively. (The Federal Government received a tick from 73 per cent.) But voters are fickle, and opinions can change quickly. We saw this over kids being in school. At first, many parents insisted their children must stay home; after a few weeks, they were pressing for schools to take them back. The schools debate produced fault lines in the National Cabinet, and now the row over borders is doing the same. That useful body remains intact, but this creates tensions, even though border policies are the decisions of individual states, not the collective. The conflict might also be something of a reality check on the idea the National Cabinet would enable a harmonious road to future economic reform. A notable feature of the COVID federalism model is that under the National Cabinet umbrella, line ups vary according to the issue. Victoria (Labor) and NSW (Coalition) were the loudest in urging early heavy restrictions, including in relation to schools. The Federal Government, with its eye on economics, instinctively preferred a lighter hand; it needed a shove to go further. Where it couldn't be moved and the states had the power, they went their own ways. On schools, Scott Morrison was adamant and always wanted them open. Similarly, it wanted borders opened. The border issue sees another cross-party grouping. The Labor jurisdictions of Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory, and the Liberal states of South Australia and Tasmania all have their borders closed. NSW and Victoria have never gone down this path. Ms Berejiklian is pushing hard for a re-opening to promote recovery. She's suggested Mr McGowan and Ms Palaszczuk are courting popularity. In the crossfire, Mr McGowan has accused Ms Berejiklian of bullying tactics and hit where it hurts. "New South Wales had the Ruby Princess  And they are trying to give us advice on our borders, seriously?" he said this week.  Ms Palaszczuk said: "We are not going to be lectured to by a state that has the highest number of cases in Australia". As notable as the fracture among governments, is the very public division between health experts. We saw this on schools, where Victoria's Chief Health Officer Brett Sutton took a much more conservative position than others. While Dr Young and WA Chief Health Officer Andrew Robertson were adamant this week on keeping their respective borders shut for the time being, federal Deputy Chief Medical Officer Paul Kelly said "from a medical point of view, I can't see why the borders are still closed". (Mr McGowan had earlier said: "I don't know who Paul Kelly is  clearly not the singer".) Dr Kelly said neither the National Cabinet nor the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (that advises it) had made decisions or given advice on state borders. Decisions on what to do were entirely up to the states. Both Dr Young and Dr Robertson are on the AHPPC, which is described as a "consensus body". "We talked through these matters and we decided not to have a position on borders," Dr Kelly explained. While it has been welcome in this crisis to see the politicians turning to the experts, we are now being sharply reminded experts can differ. How often have we heard from politicians in recent weeks, "We are relying on the medical advice"? But that doesn't always lead in one direction, and "consensus" can be a useful concealer. As the border argument intensifies the question of whether the closures are constitutional, canvassed early on in the crisis, has come back. One Nation's Pauline Hanson has accused Ms Palaszczuk of "running roughshod over the constitution", appealed for anyone affected who might want to mount a challenge to come forward, and said "I have a pro-bono, constitutional lawyer who will represent you in a High Court challenge under Section 92". Section 92 provides for "trade, commerce, and intercourse among the states" to be "absolutely free". Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. No-one could be sure how, if there were a case, the High Court would rule. The court in the past has recognised public health circumstances can justify measures that otherwise would breach section 92. But would special circumstances still apply when the virus threat had apparently receded? Attorney-General Christian Porter has dodged questions on whether the border closure could be unconstitutional. Mr Porter, a West Australian, has been measured on the issue itself. "These aren't easy decisions for state premiers to make but there's a health imperative, there's an economic imperative and there are strict constitutional rules around what is permissible and impermissible", he told a news conference on Thursday. He no doubt has in mind the thread of isolationism traditionally running through his state's thinking, and of the polling showing enormous support for the McGowan Government's COVID management. The day before, Mr Porter noted "that the Federal Government's position, on a whole range of issues, is to be forward leaning and develop workarounds to get our economy moving again". Indeed. We can expect the Morrison Government's "forward leaning" will only increase in coming weeks, with its desperation to boost economic activity. Meanwhile, premiers might need their chill pills before they meet, virtually, at National Cabinet next week. Michelle Grattan is a professorial fellow at the University of Canberra and chief political correspondent at The Conversation, where this article first appeared. 
The number of people on JobKeeper has been revised down by 3 million after Treasury and the Australian Tax Office (ATO) revealed businesses made "significant errors". The estimated cost of the program has been nearly halved from $130 billion to about $70 billion. Look back at how the day's events unfolded. By Jon Healy By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton 
No-show diners have been warned there is a "special place in hell" for them as Sydney restaurants get to grips with the state's 10-person dining rule. Eased NSW coronavirus restrictions, which came into effect last Friday, saw some restaurants and cafes open their doors again with only 10 customers allowed at a time. The newrules meant some eateries got some much-needed financial relief, but many have struggled to make opening worth their while. Surry Hills cocktail bar and restaurant Low 302 reopened this week but required bookings to secure a place.  A post addressing a no-show booking under the name Aimee went up on the bar's Facebook page on Saturday, telling her there was a "special place for you to burn in hospo hell". The post, which referenced the booking for four people, slammed the woman for wasting "40 per cent of the entire capacity". "You didn't have the common courtesy to call us up and cancel," the post read. "Maybe you have no idea the financial impact this has on a restaurant right now. Maybe you don't care. "You have single-handedly set the worst of precedence for our entire industry at this most difficult time." Low 302 now takes payment in advance to secure bookings at the restaurant, something management "really wanted to avoid having to do". Restaurateur BenSiderowitz said taking payment in advance allowed him to create an "experience" for diners while also giving staff security. Mr Siderowitz runs Corner House in Sydney's eastern suburbs and said he took 4,000 bookings after announcing a special dining package. Up to 10 people can book out the venue for four hours for a group fee of $1,000, which includes a private bartender and chef to provide unlimited pizza. "We take the deposit upfront, so if someone doesn't show up it doesn't matter," he said. "We put the onus on the customer, and with lack of supply, demand increases  people just want to snap up the spot." Mr Siderowitz said he stayed up for three nights replying to hundreds of messages that poured in after he announced the deal.  The interest was so great that Mr Siderowitz has secured a second venue, 900 metres down the road from Corner House in Bondi, which opened on Friday. Thanks to low overheads, lean staff numbers and a backlog of stock, Mr Siderowitz said it had been a big week, with most groups spending much more than the $1,000 package. "Revenue may be down 80 per cent but profit is up 100 per cent," he said. Fabio Dore runs One Ford Streetin Balmain and said the week had been fruitful for the popular restaurant. Mr Dore does not take pre-paid bookings but rather relies on the "loyalty of the locals" each night, as he has done for five years.  "I heard about the no-show in the city and I was very disappointed," he said. "It's common-sense thinking: if you book a restaurant, why wouldn't you turn up?" Mr Dore said he was comforted by the "safety net" of the JobKeeper payment for staff, which meant a no-show booking wouldn't damage the night's takings so severely. "But people should support the restaurant so it can survive, so your favourite restaurant is able to make it through this difficult time," he said. He said the 10-person limit had provided an opportunity to adapt the One Ford Street menu while maintaining a premium experience for diners. "Read the situation  if you're smart enough, what you're cooking can be a very good margin," he said. 
Changing in a time of crisis is what makes us resilient  in fact, it's what gets us through.  That's the lesson ecologist Brian Walker says we can look to as we come to grips with the coronavirus pandemic. Dr Walker, from the CSIRO, has spent a lifetime studying natural ecosystems including in Africa, Canada and the Australian outback. Each in their own way has brought him to the same conclusion: change in crisis is necessary. Resilience doesn't equal resistance. "If you have a system that you want to maintain, then resilience of that system is the capacity to absorb a disturbance," Dr Walker told The Drum. "And then reorganise as a result of that disturbance in such a way that the next time a disturbance of that kind comes along, they can cope with it better." These ideas, Dr Walker has found, can be applied to human nature. He says they are something for society to consider as we deal with the broad, ongoing impacts of COVID-19. Monash University's Rashina Hoda says observing environmental ecosystems has formed part of the software development process for a while now.  "Some of the research has looked at social networks in ant colonies: how they organise and reorganise around challenges," she said.  When it comes to the coronavirus context, the associate professor at Monash University's Department of Software Systems and Cybersecurity told The Drum that being "agile" is essential. It is a concept traditionally reserved for software engineering teams.  "You've got a swift response, clear policies through consultation with the right experts and at the same time, a very human spirit to all of it."  Dr Hoda believes "agile nations" have been more effective dealing with COVID-19  Australia included.  "I think Australia's done really well." She applauded the government's swift response to the outbreak but says a big part of the relative success has been the community's cooperation and willingness to adapt.  "If we didn't listen in and didn't follow through it would not have been possible, no matter how clear the guidelines."  "If both aren't on board with being agile, it's not going to happenn" she said.  Much as with Dr Walker's ecosystems, Dr Hoda says change is a necessary part of the equation.  "You see countries such as the United States; people who have very strongly resisted this saying we're not going to change, this is the way we live. That kind of response is not the right response to a crisis. "Even if it's just lifestyle choices for a temporary period of time." The Drum looked at the idea of resilience earlier this week and heard how different sections of the community might relate during the COVID-19 crisis.  "Country people are some of the best ones at changing and adapting to new circumstances," National Farmers Federation President Fiona Simson said.  "It's adapting and it's having hope and it's having a vision and knowing that there's something in the future and you've got some control about that." Ms Simson said now is the "perfect time" to have conversations about change, as the immediate COVID-19 threat appears to be subsiding. However, Sydney Morning Herald political editor Peter Hartcher warned Australia's decades of economic success may have left us less open to change and we're dealing with the results of that now. "The consequence was great complacency to the point where there was serious decay in our political system and failure in our ability to adapt to climate change. "We get to a pointless decade of wasted time." Now, he believes, we might be in the midst of real change.  "You're hearing statements like 'we need to think about our global supply chain arrangements' and 'need to rethink the way the medical profession and our hospitals are set up and funded," he said "Those light bulbs are going on." He does warn that statements are no good without real action.  
For organised sport the advent of National Volunteer Week can be heart warming and also somewhat problematic. It is a time when administrators reach out to their grassroots workers and acknowledge some of the glowing examples of the dedicated volunteers who keep community clubs on the field. The legendary local coach, the bloke who runs the bar or the canteen, the family that washes the jerseys, the high school kid who operates the all-abilities program and all those who perform one of the many tasks required to keep the most important level of sport ticking along. But, increasingly, the acknowledgement of volunteers can also unwittingly emphasise the widening gap between well-funded professional sports administrators and participants, and those at the base of sporting pyramid reaching into their own pockets to support their communities. Given the challenges created by the COVID-19 shutdown, this month's National Volunteer Week comes at an even more delicate time in the sometimes tense relationship between professional and community sport. As ever, most of the media's emphasis on sport over the past few months has been about the urgent attempts to get the major football codes back on the field to provide content for media partners whose rights deals fund sport  at least notionally  from top to bottom. Given this trickle-down economy, making professional leagues the first priority is justifiable, assuming these sports have demonstrated a genuine commitment to their grassroots competitions and clubs. But sport must be more dependent then ever on the commitment of volunteers over the coming months, even years, as local clubs confront the various financial and logistical hurdles they must clear to get back to training and playing in the midst of the pandemic that has flattened their economies. These challenges have become more stark in recent days as clubs across various codes grapple with the strict protocols they must follow to safely conduct even limited non-contact, small squad training sessions in preparation for still hypothetical seasons. In most cases this involves appointing a safety officer for each group of 10, recording the names and taking the temperatures of participants, ensuring squads are correctly spaced, keeping youngsters who've been cooped up for weeks from climbing all over each other and sanitising equipment. This is after club officials have calculated funding shortfalls from lost sponsorships and matchday revenue, renegotiated ground hire with local councils, considered any further fine print imposed by their leagues and associations, and factored in the health and reputational risks should their club create a COVID-19 outbreak. And before the players kick, throw or a hit a ball they will have to convince residents now using grounds as outdoor gymnasiums to exercise elsewhere, which is potentially the most confronting task of all. This is why a local club president or coach might consider with envy the supposedly "heavy burden" of an NRL or AFL official forced to choose which of several expert assistant coaches, fitness and medical staff will be excluded from their pods and bubbles. This is not to trivialise the plight of those in professional sports who might lose their incomes, rather it is merely to illustrate the very different lives of those well-paid coaches and stars who sometimes suggest "I love the game so much I would do it for nothing" and those who do. What this presents is a test of good faith for those sports administrations who this week lauded their local volunteers. Those peak-level sports administrations that genuinely appreciate the efforts will not just be uttering hollow sentiments about their volunteers. They will cut shrunken cloths in a way that ensures their grassroots commitment is maintained or find other imaginative ways to support clubs suffering hardship. Particularly, they will acknowledge the local clubs  with vastly varying levels of expertise  that were already struggling with the complex challenges of local government red tape, grant applications and other administrative issues before the pandemic put a hole in their funding and pool of volunteers, and threatened club membership numbers. At the same time local clubs might also find out during these even more testing times something about the calibre and the motivation of their own committees and volunteers, and  particularly  their commitment to their broader communities. The best of local volunteers will champion their club's efforts to get players  and particularly juniors  back on the training track despite the tough regulations.  They will understand the importance of maintaining relationships with members, particularly kids who might be lost forever if their connection with the sport is broken during the shutdown. This in itself provides a test for coaches: are you willing to supervise modified sessions that might only be recreational, or is your interest purely in training for competitive games where your own ego is invested in the outcome? While recognising the difficulties of dealing with the new protocols, I suggest the junior coach throwing his or hands in the air because non-contact skills sessions will not be rewarded with trophies and medals at the end of this season might not have been the right coach anyway. What we do know is that the volunteers honoured at this time next year after guiding their clubs through the toughest of times, and in some cases ensuring their survival, will be genuine local heroes. Offsiders will cover all the major issues from across sport, including the football codes' return to play in detail, on Sunday at 10:00am on ABC TV. 
The year began so well. In the first seven weeks of 2020, our super funds were charging ahead as the stock market went from record high to record high. It was a continuation of 2019, which had been the best year since 2013, prompting respected ratings house Super Ratings to predict that, "super members have every reason to be optimistic about 2020." Fortunately for Super Ratings, it added this caveat: "But when it comes to a repeat of 2019's double-digit returns, it would be wise to temper expectations." How right they were. Between February 20 and the March 23 the stock market crashed by 36 per cent. If ever you needed convincing that financial markets have become completely divorced from reality, just look at Wall Street's wild swings, writes Ian Verrender.  As a result, according to Super Ratings, the median balanced superannuation fund fell 8.9 per cent in March, while the median growth fund, with its higher exposure to shares, plunged 12.5 per cent. Ouch! If you are closer to the end of your working life than the beginning, and you have hundreds of thousands of dollars in your super fund, that's a lot of money gone in just a few weeks. But, like everything in life, superannuation needs some perspective. The reality is, most superannuation funds are heavily leveraged to the stock market, and markets go up, and they go down. Finding the best super arrangement can be complicated. But it's an important part of you and your family's financial future  and taking steps to improve your retirement savings may be easier than you think. Australia's biggest super fund, Australian Super, tells its members to expect to lose money five years out of 20. The hope is that the gains in the other 15 years will more than make up for the five years of losses. For Australian Super, the average annual return on its balanced fund since inception in 1985 is 9.68 per cent, despite the bad years. The last negative year for Australian Super's balanced fund was at the peak of the global financial crisis in 2009, when it lost 13.4 per cent. Since then it's been 10 consecutive years of gains, seven of them double digits. So, quite understandably, while no one was expecting COVID-19 and the havoc it's wreaked on the global economy, we should not be surprised that, at some point, our super funds were going to have a bad year after a decade of going forward. The reality for our superannuation from what's happened so far this year is that most of the gains from 2019 have been erased. It's not Armageddon, and we still have the benefits of the previous nine consecutive years of positive returns. Which raises a really important question. If you are losing a lot of sleep about what's happening to your superannuation in 2020, maybe you are in the wrong fund? Financial adviser Louise Lakomy, from Crystal Wealth Partners, told the ABC she received a big spike in calls from worried clients as the stock market tanked in March. "And that raised in my mind the issue of risk profile," she said. "If you are going to react so severely to your super going backwards, are you in the right risk profile for you?" A key tenet of investing is to choose investments that match your tolerance for risk or, more accurately, your tolerance for seeing your investment go backwards. As efforts to control COVID-19 appear to be gaining traction, many analysts and traders are hoping for a quick return to business as usual. They're likely to be disappointed, writes Ian Verrender. After a decade of seeing their super funds going onwards and upwards there are many people who are probably shocked to see them losing money and, at the same time, realising they would probably rather be in a fund that's not as exposed to the share market. The problem of course is that to change investing strategy now  to a more conservative, less share market-focussed option  is to crystallise the losses and, even worse, as Louise Lakomy explained. "No one rings a bell at the bottom of the market," she said. "If you're out of the market you'll miss the recovery." The year 2009 is a case in point. After being devastated by the GFC, the stock market hit its low point on February 28 that year. A stunning turnaround followed and by the end of 2009 it had soared by 46 per cent. While superannuation is not set and forget, it is a long-term investment that will go up and down, and we shouldn't overreact to the downs. One thing history has taught us is that the stock market may fall further, but it will come roaring back. The only thing we don't know is when. 
Life is slowly beginning to come back to some degree of normalcy in many parts of Australia, with easing restrictions seeing cinemas open again and a trip to the pub in sight. But live performing arts  whether that's delighting in a blockbuster musical, taking in the opera or seeing the latest in independent and experimental theatre  looks like one of the last things that will return to normal when this pandemic is under control. Our performing arts companies have had to cancel shows and shutter their doors since mid-March, cutting off what for many is their main income stream.  Earlier this month, COVID-19 claimed its first major arts scalp: Carriageworks  Australia's biggest multi-arts venue  went into administration due to a combination of lost income from the venue closure, insufficient reserves and a last-minute failure to secure its anticipated state government funding. Hear the latest stories from stages across the country. Elsewhere in the arts sector, companies are reeling from the latest funding round announcement by the Australia Council, the Federal Government's arts funding body, which left 49 previously funded small-to-medium arts organisations without four-year operational funding. We asked five companies  from major players to smaller companies without federal funding  how they are faring through the shutdown.  Their answers highlight fears around the uncertain future and significant hurdles to overcome, as well as the creative ways they are adapting to the sector's shutdown.  Julian Louis is the artistic director and CEO of the Northern Rivers Performing Arts Group (NORPA), a theatre company based in Lismore in northern New South Wales. NORPA has had to cancel six productions and postpone another. The company's income has taken an additional hit from cancelled venue hire. While they have been able to keep their core staff on through the JobKeeper program, this doesn't include artists (who are employed on short-term contracts, making them ineligible for the scheme). Louis told RN's The Stage Show that during the shutdown he's asked his staff "to work outside their normal spheres, to think about the company differently  and it's actually [been] a very creative time". "It's a rare time where you're not under the pressure of an opening night [coming up], ticket sales and box office success. So we're actually looking at renewing ourselves, which is really valuable and very rare." Louis says that despite the setbacks of COVID-19, his company's future is secure after NORPA found themselves on the right side of the Australia Council's recent funding decisions. That means that from 2021, NORPA will have four-year-funding for the first time in its 27-year history. "I know that [federal arts funding] is a very small pie though, and the number of companies that miss out on this, and we've been one in the past  and it's devastating," says Louis. The arts sector's current funding crisis can be traced back to 2015, when George Brandis, then minister for the arts, siphoned $104.7 million away from the Australia Council into the National Programme for Excellence in the Arts, a fund distributed at his discretion. "The Federal Government really has not increased its funding as our industry has grown," says Louis. In the last financial year, the Australia Council distributed $186 million of funding (across the entire sector, from the Major Performing Arts companies down to individual artists), down from $199.2 million in 2013-2014 (which, adjusted for inflation, is equivalent to $216 million today). Perth children's theatre company Barking Gecko is one of the 49 companies that will lose federal funding from 2021.  "The funding announcement coming right in the middle of COVID-19 has really created a perfect storm and taken the planks of stability out from under the company," says artistic director Luke Kerridge.  "The worry is not the short-term but the medium-term." Barking Gecko has had to postpone their 2020 season due to COVID-19, including their ambitious touring plans and the creation of new work. "Then [we had to] pivot really quickly and reimagine what right now looks like, and what 2021 looks like," says Kerridge. Kerridge says that by accessing JobKeeper and repurposing touring funds they have been able to retain their staff, which has enabled them to launch a new digital initiative to continue connecting and creating with children through the shutdown: Isolate > Create > Connect. This program sees Barking Gecko partner with Indian youth arts company ThinkArts to deliver weekly creative tasks to children, designed by artists. Despite the challenges wrought by both the pandemic and the funding decision, Kerridge is feeling "strangely optimistic". "My hope is that coming back together in a physical space will take on more meaning post-COVID; maybe we will enjoy that sense of togetherness more now that we've seen that we can take it for granted." Kerridge and his team are looking forward to returning to the production that Barking Gecko had been developing before the shutdown  House  which has an eerily timely story. "It's about characters who wait out a storm in a house, and then have to summon the resilience to go back out there once it's over." At the end of last year, Lee Lewis left the intimacy of Sydney's 105-seat Griffin theatre to become artistic director of Queensland Theatre  a major performing arts (MPA) company funded through the MPA framework. Queensland Theatre has two spaces  the larger one with 350 seats  and Lewis says they've had to scale back hours at the company and let some of their staff go (the company is a statutory body of the Queensland Government, and thus ineligible for JobKeeper). "We're talking about the next steps beyond that, depending on how long this goes for. If we manage to perform before the end of the year, then we're hoping to minimise that impact," Lewis says. "But if it goes longer than we're projecting at the moment, then there's not a lot of great future for the permanency of this company." With no income from performances, Queensland Theatre's expenditure nonetheless continues: they are still delivering their education program to 100 schools around the state (which they've now taken online), staffing the winding down of their subscription season  and starting to plan for the eventual re-opening.  Lewis says mounting plays at the scale of Queensland Theatre is costly and would be unsustainable with the reduced audience entailed by social distancing restrictions. "I feel like the Federal Government, especially, just doesn't have any interest in addressing the problems that we're facing in the arts community. And that was before the shutdown," Lewis says. "I feel like we've failed as an industry to convince government over the last 20 years of our inherent worth to the society that we live in. I think we've got to stop trying to lobby government and I think we've got to take our focus back to winning over audiences." Queensland Ballet, also funded through the MPA framework, employs 180 people (including 60 dancers) and has been able to keep staff on through the JobKeeper scheme. Artistic director Li Cunxin says that the first step the company took once they knew the shutdown was imminent was "creating as much online content as possible". This has included classes and coaching sessions for the dancers as well as the public. They also had to get flooring and portable ballet barres out to their dancers so that they could stay fit at home. Cunxin says there are two priorities for his company at the moment: "One is to keep our team together  So during these isolation period times  [when things try] to pull us apart, we have to be even stronger as a team." "And the second thing for us is really planning ahead to not only survive this pandemic but also emerge a stronger and more focused organisation." Queensland Ballet performs in a theatre with a capacity of 2,000, making a return to "business as usual" highly unlikely in the short term; accordingly, the company has made the decision to move its entire 2020 season to 2021. "[But] we obviously still have expenses we have to pay. And our 60-year anniversary gala was pulled a week before [it was scheduled to take place]  so the whole program [was] set, choreographed, rehearsed, we had overseas creatives fly in," Cunxin says. The company is forecasting a 43 per cent decline in revenue for 2020 but is hoping donors and corporate partners will step up, launching   a campaign and website to generate donations. Queensland Ballet will also be releasing 60 new short dance works on this platform, choreographed by their dancers and commissioned to celebrate the company's 60th anniversary. "I do hope when we come out of this that we all will be able to continue to practice or deliver the magic of this art form," says Cunxin. Declan Greene is the new artistic director of Griffin  the country's only theatre company dedicated to new Australian writing, which performs works in the 105-seat SBW Stables Theatre in Sydney's Darlinghurst. "You're literally breathing the same air as the performers, but that sounded a lot more appealing before COVID," says Greene. Griffin have retained their casual front-of-house, box office and bar staff  who are directors and playwrights with their own artistic practices  in part-time jobs as literary associates during the shutdown. They were also able to pay the actors and creatives for their production of Kindness, which was scheduled to open shortly after the shutdown began. He says that they were in the financial position to do so because the first show of the 2020 season  David Williamson's Family Values  "far exceeded its box office targets". Griffin receives funding from the Australia Council and Create NSW, and is supported by philanthropy; Greene says they are unlikely to share Carriageworks' fate. "The more troubling thing for us is just  it's obviously a hugely uncertain world that we're attempting to plan for." None of the artistic directors we spoke to know when, or for how long, social distancing measures will be eased enough to allow for performances. "So it just becomes very, very unpredictable about just how we  still manage to employ artists to make art, which is something that is a huge priority for the company," he says. In the meantime, the company undertook an experimental program of works called Griffin Lock-in, in which they paid five artists to make one-off performances for live streaming. "It's really interesting to explore ways that we can kind of create liveness and create a sense of live theatrical community online," Greene says. His interest in online performance extends beyond the pandemic, "because there are a lot of accessibility barriers in theatre as well, which are sometimes financial  and also [sometimes] to do with just access for neurodiverse and disabled folk". "So that's definitely something I want to continue exploring as a company." 
Oluwaseun Ayodeji Osowobi left London triumphant and exhausted, but satisfied. She had gone to the UK to lobby for her Nigerian organisation, Stand to End Rape, and be the flag bearer at the annual Commonwealth Day ceremony. She even met Prince Charles at a glamorous reception in London. But on the plane back to Lagos in mid-March, Ms Osowobi started to feel extremely ill. "I thought that maybe I had malaria, maybe I was tired because I'd had a busy week I didn't think it was coronavirus," she told the ABC.  The symptoms worsened when she got home.  "I was experiencing diarrhoea, I was vomiting, I was nauseous, I couldn't eat, I lost my sense of taste  it was a very tough period for me," Ms Osowobi said.  The 29-year-old, who is a prominent campaigner against sexual violence in Nigeria, had heard about the global spread of coronavirus and quickly got herself tested.  The positive result made her one of the African continent's first confirmed cases of COVID-19.  "It was new in Nigeria. I was the third case and the first female, actually and it was very scary," she said. Her case of COVID-19 was so bad that she became fearful she might die.  "With the number of deaths recorded globally, I was almost certain I might not pull through, surviving the virus." But when she recovered and went public with her experiences, she was attacked online and accused of lying.  With the backing of health authorities and international agencies, she released a video urging others to practice social distancing and get themselves tested.  "I was the first person actually in Nigeria to come forward about surviving COVID-19 and I had photos, I had evidence to back up my story," she said. "When that video was published people still said 'how much was I paid by the government?', 'what kind of lie was I sharing online?', so it was very sad to read that." In Nigeria, like a number of countries in Africa, many people were sceptical about the virus, suspecting governments were exaggerating the threat.  Myths circulated in Nigeria that the disease only affected rich people or would be killed by hot weather. "It is reflecting an attitude of disbelief and lack of trust in the system," Ms Osowobi said of her doubters. "They thought the Government was using the virus to embezzle money or get donations." Coronavirus has been slow to spread across Africa, but Ms Osowobi's experience shows some of the challenges the continent could face when COVID-19 takes hold.  There are about 85,000 confirmed cases of African COVID-19, according to the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. For a continent with more than one billion residents, that's a comparatively low infection rate.  Meanwhile, the United States has more than one million cases of COVID-19 among its 328 million citizens.  The World Health Organisation says transmission rates have been much lower in Africa than elsewhere because of poor transport networks and low levels of economic integration.  Several African nations also implemented restrictions early on in the pandemic, according to the WHO's Emergency Operations Manager in Africa, Dr Michel Yao. "Some countries even started the measures before receiving cases so this could have slowed down the process," Dr Michel Yao told the ABC.  "Most of the first cases were imported so it was within a certain class of people who can afford to travel. It was not in the high-density places where the disease can spread faster." Dr Yao says the outbreak has not yet reached many rural areas.  "We face a situation that the number of cases is increasing as detection capacity increases, but it's not at the level that was experienced in China or Europe or the USA," he said.  Some African countries have even reported the number of active cases dropping to zero, but Dr Yao told the ABC that does not mean authorities could relax.  "We are very worried about 24 countries in sub-Saharan Africa and also Algeria. Half of them have community transmission and this is our main worry," he said. "If this community transmission moves into the high-density areas the situation could change, so we are not saying the situation is under control." The slow spread had led the WHO to predict the disease could "smoulder" in Africa, meaning localised outbreaks could continue for years. Some fear that if the rest of the world moves on while Africa continues to suffer from outbreaks, that would lead to greater travel restrictions, increased economic hardship and irregular migration to Europe and elsewhere. A massive testing and tracing effort is underway to prevent the disease from becoming entrenched. The Africa Centres for Disease Control (CDC) says health authorities will test 10 million people over the next six months. The CDC deputy director Dr Ahmed Ogwell Ouma said he doubted African nations would become a reservoir for COVID-19 because of their experience dealing with epidemics like the outbreaks of Ebola.  "We are way more prepared than many countries in the world and we are prepared because we have had huge epidemics before," he said. "We are going to get a very good control over this virus in a shorter time than others have done, simply because we have learnt lessons from previous outbreaks and we are using those lessons to try to contain the spread of the virus," he said.  African nations have some of the lowest rates of intensive care beds per capita, but few countries have faced excessive demand yet.  The WHO said this is because African nations have a much younger population than Europe and the US. In some countries, only 2 per cent of the population is above the age of 60.  They have also pointed out that some nations have recorded high rates of asymptomatic cases and low numbers of cases with severe complications. But there are countries where a questionable government response could be clouding the extent of the crisis. In Tanzania, President John Magufuli has refused to shut places of worship, while also casting doubt on testing and questioning the danger of the virus. Tanzania's Government has not reported new case figures since April 29. Meanwhile, in Burundi, the country's repressive Government expelled the WHO team after facing criticism for its lax response to the pandemic. Burundi pressed ahead with an election on May 20 despite the presence of the disease.  Many countries still have active conflicts, making it difficult for health authorities to implement containment and testing.  Even once African nations get through the pandemic, they could face another crisis: a lack of food caused by economic disruptions and lockdowns, which have come at the same time as locust plagues and drought in East Africa.  Joseph Siegel, the director of research for the Africa Centre for Strategic Studies, studied the effects of the Spanish flu pandemic on African nations and found that starvation was widespread.  "The bulk of the pandemic happened in 1918 but a lot of the famine and near-famine conditions happened in 1919, so I think for Africa we want to be keeping an eye on food production and helping to protect that," Mr Siegel said. "With so many people living off subsistence wages now, the food crisis is already affecting people."  
Victoria's year 12 students will begin to sit their final exams in early November after weeks of uncertainty and disruption as schools prepare for students to return from next week. Many students were anxious about exams spilling over into 2021 with a potential disruption to higher education ambitions. But the Andrews Government now says exams will all be completed by December 2, which is two weeks later than the original completion date of November 18 set before the pandemic. The announcement comes as year 11 and 12 students as well as prep, year 1 and year 2 students prepare to return to the classroom next Tuesday after nearly six weeks of remote learning. With VCE exams to be finished at the start of December, year 12 students will receive their ATAR score before the end of 2020, rather than January 2021, which was feared at the height of the COVID-19 crisis. VCE exams will begin in the week starting November 9, which is a month earlier than expected when learning from home was first announced. The changes mean university offers can be made to Victorian students in time for the start of the 2021 academic year. Education Minister James Merlino said on Friday the Victorian Curriculum and Assessment Authority (VCAA) had made "tweaks" to Unit 4 VCE content and assessments in light of COVID-19, but said exams would not be altered. Mr Merlino said starting exams in November meant "no disadvantage for Victorian students in terms of university and other pathways". "The pathway for students will be exactly the same as students right around the country," he said. But Portland Bayview College principal Michelle Kearney told the ABC Mr Merlino's comments were "a very urban-centric viewpoint". She said regional students should be granted special consideration because of poor quality internet during the lockdown compared to their metro counterparts. "That's one of the things that has been an issue for us. The lack of real reliability of the internet for some of our Zoom lessons that we've had with our students," she said. "Regional students need to have special entry consideration looked at." The Australian Principals Federation previously called for year 12 exams to be axed this year, after concerns the crisis would leave many students unfairly disadvantaged. Year 12 student at Minaret College Rumaan Baryala is a member of the Victorian Student Representative Council and told ABC Radio Melbourne the announcement was the first time he was "glad to hear about an exam timetable". Updated Sunday, May 24 Mr Baryala said he was "really happy to receive clarity" about the exams and students' chances of getting in university in 2021. "Obviously I'm still going to be anxious about [COVID-19] when I return back to the classroom, it will still be in the back of my mind. But we'll try to distract ourselves as much as we can," Mr Baryala said. Alice, who is also in year 12, told ABC Radio Melbourne remote learning had brought its challenges and not being around others had been difficult. "This has come at a good time, waiting this long has been good because we haven't been jumping around and changing routines. It has been nice to slow down life and be able to focus on our study routine," she said. Mr Merlino said it was too early to tell if there would be a notable rise in the number of year 12 students applying for special consideration this year. Schools in Victoria will have a pupil-free day on Monday before year 11 and 12 students as well as prep, year 1 and year 2 students return to the classroom on Tuesdayafter almost six weeks of remote learning. Those who teach other year levels will conduct home learning from the school. Mr Merlino said staggered pick-up and drop-off times would be implemented to prevent parents congregating at the school gate but physical distancing would not take place in classrooms. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Mr Merlino also said the Government had advised schools to provide refunds of schools fees to parents for things like camps and excursions. "Those things won't be part of school life for some time yet," he said. "We're giving some common sense advice to schools, in terms of parent fees for those kinds of extracurricular activities." Mr Merlino said the Government was supporting and working closely with schools that had been financially impacted by COVID-19. Mr Merlino said he understood some teachers, parents and students would be concerned about their health when students returned to the classroom. He referenced a "significant increase in funding to make sure that schools are cleaned regularly" and said hand sanitiser, guidelines for within schools and the huge drive to voluntarily test teachers were in place to protect the health of students and staff. He said 10,000 school staff had been tested for coronavirus over the last 10 days and none had tested positive. State schools will be staggering lunch, recess and library visiting times to avoid students in different year levels coming into contact with one another. "Each school will work through this on a school-by-school basis," Mr Merlino said. Playgrounds will be open for students in schools and cleaned regularly but water fountains are off-limits. 
A rare out-of-cycle cyclone that has formed into a category one system in the Indian Ocean is set to bring dangerous weather to Western Australia, including Perth, from Sunday. Tropical Cyclone Mangga will impact the Cocos Keeling Islands today before tracking towards WA. The official Australian cyclone season ends on April 30 and the Bureau of Meteorology (BOM) said while some cyclones were known to form in early May, it was rare to see one so late in the month. The Cyclone Mangga was located about 515 kilometres north-west of the Cocos Keeling Islands just before midnight and was expected to pass to the west of the islands later today, potentially resulting in heavy rainfall and a period of gale-force winds.  The BOM said it was expected to weaken tomorrow as it continued to move south-east towards WA's north-west coast and was "highly unlikely to be a tropical cyclone" come Sunday. Senior forecaster Luke Huntington said the combination of a tropical low and a cold front occurring at the same time, especially this time of year, was out of the ordinary. "We don't normally see this system at all, really, so it's quite unprecedented," he said. "If it was going to happen, it would be earlier in the summer period when we do get the tropical cyclones and lows  but to have it this late in the season, it is quite unusual. "It's just a coincidence the cold front came up at the same time and it's just going to deepen this low as it comes down towards the west coast, and create all that rain and the damaging winds." Torrential rain and dangerous winds are expected to come from the state's north-west before extending south-east over the remainder of the state on Sunday and Monday. "We can expect widespread damaging winds of around 100 kilometres an hour and in some regions it could even exceed 125kph," Mr Huntington said. "There's also some quite significant rainfall associated with it as well  in isolated areas, particularly along the west coast, some areas could receive even up to 100 millimetres." BOM spokesman Neil Bennett said yesterday it was "an evolving and dynamic system" that would still pack a punch on Sunday as it tracked down the west coast. "It'll produce severe weather, in terms of wind, some heavy rainfall in places and significant wave heights," he said. "We're looking at dangerous swells, severe weather warnings for the winds and possibly some heavy rainfall as well  right up and down the west coast." BOM has cautioned that it was still too early to pinpoint which areas would be hardest hit, but a prolonged period of strong winds was expected. Do you know how cyclones could affect you and what to pack in your survival kit? Take our quiz to see how prepared you really are. It said at this stage, rainfall totals in Pilbara coastal areas were likely to be about 2040mm, with isolated falls from Karratha to Kalbarri of up to 100mm. Heavy rain is also possible along coastal areas from Kalbarri to Albany, including Perth, with totals of about 2030mm and some isolated falls up to 70mm. At least 510mm is forecast for much of the Wheatbelt, with areas closer to the west coast expecting 1020mm. Peak wave heights in excess of 8 metres are predicted for much of the west coast on Monday and they have the potential to cause significant beach erosion, while storm tides could lead to coastal inundation. The severe weather will coincide with the first weekend since regional travel restrictions were eased in WA, with an influx of people expected on the roads. But fine weather is forecast for most of the state until Sunday, providing plenty of opportunity to tie down loose items around the home and clear out gutters. Here's a guide to help you work out what will be allowed from May 18 and what is still offlimits. In WA, late autumn and winter rainfall usually comes in the form of cold fronts. The BOM has described this system as a "rare event"  the result of the remnants of a tropical low interacting with a cold front coming up from the south. "This sort of system has happened in the past, but it's something that would probably only happen once every two or three years, maybe even once every five to 10," Mr Bennett said. A similar event occurred in June 2012, which led to more than 600 calls for assistance and more than 170,000 homes losing power. Squally winds and rain are also forecast for Monday but conditions should gradually ease throughout the day. 
They're not neighbours, yet somehow New South Wales and Western Australia have managed to engage themselves in a border skirmish. The verbal grenades between the two state's premiers have created fresh cracks in the relatively harmonious cooperation between the states and territories over coronavirus. So what's really going on? While a medical expert panel drove the decision to shut Australia's international borders, decision-making about domestic travel has been made by individual states and territories. Those with closed borders  the Northern Territory, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania and Western Australia  have cited health reasons for their reluctance to reopen them too quickly. But NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian clearly has her state's economy in mind as she calls for these borders to reopen. NSW is heavily reliant on tourism and even though it's unlikely to see international travellers for some time, allowing more domestic holiday-makers would help struggling accommodation, food and entertainment businesses. Last year, 39 million domestic travellers visited New South Wales, spending more than $23.5 billion. Almost $10 billion of this was spent by 14.8 million holidaymakers. In comparison, just over 4 million domestic travellers chose to holiday in WA, spending more than $3 billion. WA's border closure  creating what Premier Mark McGowan dubbed "an island within an island"  has not dramatically hurt the state's all-important resources industry. Interstate fly-in, fly-out workers have been able to enter the state because the resources industry was deemed an essential service by the WA Government. So borders aren't as big an economic issue for WA as they are for NSW. But clearly the spat is not just about economics, as Ms Berejiklian suggested to ABC News Breakfast this morning. "I'm sure those premiers are getting more popular in their states for keeping their borders closed," she said. Her theory could help explain why the Queensland Government has joined in on the border wars, despite the importance of domestic tourism to the local economy. More than 10 million holidaymakers spent more than $9.5 billion there last year and its tourism industry wants the borders reopened. Yet today Queensland Tourism Minister Mark Bailey echoed Mr McGowan in saying NSW was in no position to be "lecturing" other states. WA has closed its borders to the east for the first time in history. Here's how you might be affected. "NSW needs to get its act together and get community transmission down, and we will all be better off throughout this nation, including in Queensland," he said. Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk faces an election in just over five months, which Peter Kennedy, Adjunct Professor of politics at Notre Dame University, said was a key factor in her Government's stance. "I think the Labor Government in Queensland does have a close eye on that poll, understandably, and they would be playing to what they believe to be the best interests of Queenslanders and what also would be electorally popular," he said. In the Northern Territory last week, Chief Minister Michael Gunner was keen to remind his citizens that they lived in the "safest place in Australia" as he poured the first beer since pubs reopened last week. In WA, where the rest of Australia is known as "the Eastern States" and Liberal politicians debated a "WAxit" secession motion just three years ago, Mr McGowan has also played to the local crowd. Mr McGowan has claimed WA was being "bullied" by NSW and said he didn't want to be told what to do by a state which allowed the Ruby Princess coronavirus outbreak to occur.  "New South Wales had the Ruby Princess  I mean, seriously? And they are trying to give us advice on our borders, seriously?" he said yesterday. With sky-high approval ratings, he is undoubtedly keen to maintain this domestic support when he contests the next state election in March. "Western Australians don't like being told by other states what to do, but this is one example where our geographic isolation has worked in our favour," Professor Kennedy said. Latest information from the WA Health Department But the state's health experts have been clear public safety is driving the decision-making in WA, which has a relatively low level of coronavirus infections. For this reason, West Australians still can't even travel freely within their state, due to regional border closures, let alone to other parts of the nation. And that's unlikely to change anytime soon. 
Unfair dismissal claims have increased by 70 per cent during the coronavirus crisis, with the Fair Work Commission dealing with an "unprecedented" caseload. The Senate's dedicated COVID-19 inquiry has been grilling public servants in Canberra today, trying to get the latest snapshot of the workforce as the nation continues to grapple with the economic impact of the pandemic. Bernadette O'Neill, general manager of the Fair Work Commission (FWC), said the rate of complaints coming through her agency was "significantly higher than any other period". "Dismissal claims have been reasonably constant over a number of years now," she told the committee. "We have seen a modest increase through the course of this financial year to date. "But what we're seeing at the moment, and the latest figures that I've got, is an increase of more than 70 per cent in unfair dismissal claims. "I think it's fair to say that an explanation clearly is COVID-19." According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, 594,000 Australians lost their job in April as the pandemic squeezed the Australian economy. Given the widespread economic shockwaves caused by the outbreak, and the tough social restrictions which have forced many businesses to close their doors, the FWC believes the figures were not entirely unexpected. "Internal research that we've done, for example, points to a positive correlation between unemployment levels and retrenchment rates and unfair dismissal claims," Ms O'Neill said. Community legal centres had been preparing for an influx in requests for help during the pandemic, expecting an increase in employment and tenancy disputes. A Fair Work Commission spokesperson told the ABC there had been a significant spike in staff and employers contacting the Fair Work Ombudsman about workplace issues arising from the pandemic. During April, more than 75 per cent of COVID-19 calls related to JobKeeper, most of which were from employees. Last month's unemployment figures showed close to 600,000 jobs had been lost since the beginning of the economic downturn. The headline unemployment rate rose to 6.2 per cent, but Treasury Secretary Steven Kennedy told the Senate committee that the real number of people who were out of work was sitting at around 15 per cent. The Commonwealth's JobKeeper wage subsidy program, which came into effect at the beginning of May and is due to operate for six months, has already paid out $8.1 billion to recipients. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. It is estimated the 900,000 businesses that have registered for the JobKeeper program employ more than 6 million staff between them. The Senate committee questioned senior Treasury officials, including secretary Steven Kennedy, about how much Commonwealth support had flowed to Australians doing it tough through the virus-fuelled downturn. More than 1.6 million Australians have made applications to access their superannuation early, and withdrawals have hit $13.2 billion. The Federal Government tweaked the rules for early access to superannuation in cases of financial hardship early on in the coronavirus outbreak. People can access $10,000 this financial year and another $10,000 from July 1. 
Grocery outlet owner, Kevin Allen, hired three Generation Z butchery apprentices, none of whom completed their training, before he found 'the one'. Mr Allen said while taking a seminar led by a workplace psychologist, he learnt that Gen Z workers, born from the mid-1990s onwards, were raised in a different technological age from that of their predecessors, the Millennials, born from the mid-80s to the mid-90s. Adopting workplace technology more suitable to his younger workers led to better communication and happier staff, he said. "I've opened up a Messenger account on my phone, and I've got every single employee on the Messenger now, so I can send a message out to them all individually," Mr Allen said Regular team meetings where employees could discuss any challenges they were facing had also helped, he said. "If there's any problems we're all talking about it together," Mr Allen said. "I'm hoping to make my employees happier, which it is, and then it makes my life and my job much easier." Psychologist Danielle Buckley has been providing advice to employers on how to bridge the generational gap with young employees and keep Gen Zs in their jobs. Part of the solution to the challenges created by different generational attitudes, Ms Buckley said, was embracing the role of technology in communicating with  and training  Gen Z employees. And statistics suggest that bridging the generational gap is an ongoing issue for many employers. The number of people choosing to take up apprenticeships and traineeships has plummeted by a third since the Coalition took office, according to data from the Department of Education. According to Apprenticeship Careers Australia general manager, Luke Radford, completion rates for apprenticeships in New South Wales are as low as 45 per cent in some trades, with the hospitality and automotive industries among those struggling the most to keep their young employees. That was why he retained Ms Buckley to offer advice to employers on how to better connect with their young workers. Mr Radford said there were several reasons apprenticeship dropout rates were so high. He said young people were applying for jobs that were available, or that their parents suggested, rather than identifying trades and employers they were best suited to. However, Mr Radford said he also saw the generational gap causing problems between older employers and younger apprentices and trainees, especially when it came to technology. "Most of the communication that young people do is via apps or via different text messages and the like," he said. "We spend a lot of time communicating via text rather than phone calls, because they don't pick up our phone calls; they communicate via text to us." Beyond the difference in technological uptake, Ms Buckley said the current Generation Z apprentices had a different mindset from that of Millennials. "Unlike the earlier generation, the Millennials, who grew up with the emergence of technology, our Gen Zs have been raised with technology in the palm of their hand," she said. You don't have to have been born between 1946 and 1964 to feel confused about the "OK boomer" phenomenon. Here's how the phrase went all over the internet. "Because of that they've got so much access to information and platforms.  "And this really informs the way that they are, the way they think and the things they believe." According to Ms Buckley, this access to information has led to a generation of young people that wants to build meaningful relationships and work in a way that helps solve problems that the world is facing, from climate change to terrorism. Ms Buckley said Generation Z also had a desire for stability that was different to the generation before it. "Us psychologists say they [Millennials] grew up in the world of the self-esteem movement of parenting where your parents said, 'You can be anything, the world's your oyster'," she said. "But now we're seeing kids today faced with [real-world problems]  I mean look at what's gone down in the world in the last 12 months. "We've had floods, we've had fires, we've got the coronavirus going around the world as well." Another important component to apprenticeship success is making sure that the values of the employer and employee are well-matched, Ms Buckley said. "Everybody is different, and we want businesses to start thinking about, not just 'I want an apprentice', but what sort of person and what sort of culture do you want your business to have," he said. "What we're seeing with young people, particularly Gen Z, is that they want organisations or businesses who match their values  we've seen this more and more. "We saw recently some bands who have said 'no' to playing different concerts because of the carbon footprint they're creating, and I think this really highlights some of the attitudes of young people today." 
President Donald Trump's re-election campaign is filing a libel suit accusing the New York Times of intentionally publishing a false opinion article that suggested Russia and the campaign had an overarching deal in the 2016 US election. In an escalation of the Republican President's long-running battle with the news media, campaign officials said the lawsuit was being filed in state court in New York. Asked about the lawsuit at a White House news conference Mr Trump said the Times had "got a lot wrong over the last number of years". Mr Trump said he would let the lawsuit "work its way through the courts. And there'll be more coming". A campaign statement said the aim of the suit against the Times, among the most prominent American news organisations, was to hold the newspaper "accountable for intentionally publishing false statements against President Trump's campaign." There are five main takeaways from Robert Mueller's report on Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election. The lawsuit relates to a March 27, 2019, opinion article written by Max Frankel, who served as executive editor of the Times from 1986 to 1994. A draft copy of the suit, attached to a campaign news release, accused the newspaper of "extreme bias against and animosity toward the campaign", and cited what it called the Times' "exuberance to improperly influence the presidential election in November 2020". Mr Trump is seeking re-election on November 3. In a statement, a New York Times spokesperson said: "The Trump campaign has turned to the courts to try to punish an opinion writer for having an opinion they find unacceptable. "Fortunately, the law protects the right of Americans to express their judgments and conclusions, especially about events of public importance. We look forward to vindicating that right in this case." The newspaper's spokesperson said it had not been served with the suit and learned about it through media reports. Mr Trump's criticism of what he calls liberal bias in the US news media plays well with his conservative political base and often generates applause at his political rallies where his supporters often jeer journalists.  Mr Trump often refers to various news media outlets as "fake news" and has called elements of the US news media "the enemy of the American people". The New York Times was involved in a landmark 1964 Supreme Court ruling that has served as a safeguard for media reporting on public figures.  In the case New York Times v Sullivan, the court decided that the US Constitution's First Amendment protection for freedom of the press allows even statements that are false to be published as long as the publication was not done with "actual malice". The suit, according to the draft copy released by the campaign, accused the newspaper of a "malicious motive" and "reckless disregard for the truth". Benjamin Zipursky, a professor at Fordham University School of Law, said the lawsuit was unlikely to succeed because US defamation law does not allow liability for a sincerely held belief about a public figure, like Mr Trump. He said judges would be sceptical of the claims and inclined to dismiss them. "They're going to be very concerned with the First Amendment implications of allowing a case like this to move forward," he said. Senator Bernie Sanders, the front-runner in the race for the Democratic nomination to face Mr Trump in the November election, denounced the lawsuit. "Trump has called the press the 'enemy of the people,' and now  taking a page from his dictator friends around the world  is trying to dismantle the right to a free press in the First Amendment by suing the New York Times for publishing an opinion column about his dangerous relationship with Russia," Mr Sanders said. Former special counsel Robert Mueller documented Moscow's campaign of hacking and social media propaganda to boost Mr Trump's 2016 candidacy and harm his Democratic opponent Hillary Clinton. It documented numerous contacts between people associated with Mr Trump's campaign and Russians. Mr Mueller found insufficient evidence to show a criminal conspiracy between Mr Trump's team and Russia but did not exonerate Mr Trump of obstruction of justice related to the investigation. In the opinion piece, Mr Frankel stated: "Collusion  or a lack of it  turns out to have been the rhetorical trap that ensnared President Trump's pursuers." Mr Frankel added: "There was no need for detailed electoral collusion between the Trump campaign and Vladimir Putin's oligarchy because they had an overarching deal: the quid of help in the campaign against Hillary Clinton for the quo of a new pro-Russian foreign policy, starting with relief from the Obama administration's burdensome economic sanctions. The Trumpites knew about the quid and held out the prospect of the quo." These are main characters in Robert Mueller's investigation into Russian meddling in the 2016 Presidential election, and any charges they face (or have faced). Quid pro quo is a Latin term meaning a favour in exchange for a favour. Mr Trump in January 2018 criticised US defamation laws as "a sham and a disgrace" following publication of a book by author Michael Wolff called Fire and Fury: Inside the Trump White House, which among other things questioned the President's mental health. Conservative Justice Clarence Thomas last year urged his Supreme Court colleagues to consider overturning the New York Times v Sullivan precedent. In a statement on the suit, Jenna Ellis, senior legal adviser to Mr Trump's campaign, said: "The statements were and are 100 per cent false and defamatory." "The complaint alleges the Times was aware of the falsity at the time it published them, but did so for the intentional purpose of hurting the campaign, while misleading its own readers in the process." Reuters 
An employee has opened fire at Milwaukee's Molson Coors brewing complex, killing five fellow workers before taking his own life, police said. The gunman was identified as a 51-year-old Milwaukee man. Police said the bloodshed was confined to the brewing facility, and that "no members of the general public were involved". Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett said it was an "unspeakable tragedy" for the city. "There were five individuals who went to work today, just like everybody goes to work, and they thought they were going to go to work, finish their day and return to their families. They didn't  and tragically they never will," he said. "It is a horrible, horrible day for the employees here. It's a very rough day for anyone who is close to this situation," he added. US President Donald Trump addressed the shooting before speaking at the White House with reporters about steps his administration is taking to combat the coronavirus.  "Our hearts break for them and their loved ones," the President said.  "We send our condolences. We'll be with them, and it's a terrible thing, a terrible thing." Wisconsin Lieutenant Governor Mandela Barnes said it was the scene of "another American tragedy". "A senseless American tragedy, and one that shouldn't have had to happen," Mr Barnes said. Authorities did not immediately release details about the shooter or how the shooting unfolded. Molson Coors CEO Gavin Hattersley called the shooter "an active brewery employee". "Unfortunately, I am devastated to share that we lost five other members of our family in this tragic incident," he said in an email sent to employees. "There are no words to express the deep sadness many of us are feeling right now." "We are all a family. We work a lot of hours together, so we're all very sad," said Selena Curka, a brewery employee who was about to start her shift when the complex went on lockdown and she was turned away. "It's just weird, because nine times out of 10 you're going to know the shooter," said employee Thomas Milner.  "It's a tight-knit family. Within the brewery, we all interact with each other." At least 600 people work at the complex, which is widely known in the Milwaukee area as "Miller Valley", a reference to the Miller Brewing Company that is now part of Molson Coors. A massive red Miller sign towers over the complex and is a well-known symbol in Milwaukee. ABC/Wires 
The Federal Government has swiftly rejected recommendations from the Productivity Commission to axe the special tax concession for people living in remote parts of Australia. A report from the Productivity Commission released this week said the concessions were outdated, inequitable and poorly-designed. But Assistant Treasurer Michael Sukkar quickly ruled out any changes and moved to calm fears. "Were they to be implemented, the Productivity Commission's recommendations would result in significant disruption to existing arrangements," Minister Sukkar said in a statement. "Given the challenges faced by regional Australia, including as a result of the impacts of the recent drought, bushfires and now Coronavirus, the Government will not be acting on the Productivity Commission's recommendations. "The most important thing we can do at this time is continue to provide certainty and confidence to those living in regional areas that the Government remains fully committed to supporting the growth of our regions and their continued success into the future." The report looked at the effects of the zone tax offset, remote area allowance and remote area concessions for fringe benefits tax on people and businesses in remote areas. It recommended abolishing the Zone Tax Offset (ZTO), a benefit of around $300 a year to help compensate for the higher cost of living in remote areas.  The move would save the Federal Government about $150 million a year. The commission argued that the concession was "poorly targeted" with almost half the claimants living in large cities such as Townsville, Cairns, Darwin and Mackay. If it were to be kept, it recommended limiting it to only "very remote areas".  It also wanted the government to review the Regional Area Allowance, a supplementary payment for income support recipients. But it was the proposed changes to Fringe Benefits Tax remote area concessions which generated the most angst in remote areas like the Pilbara in Western Australia. The Commission said the government was forgoing up to $390 million in tax revenue a year because employer-provided housing was exempt from Fringe Benefits Tax, and this should be reduced to only a 50 per cent concession. Queensland LNP Senator Susan McDonald said the concessions were hugely important to regional Australia and the report showed a lack of understanding of life in the bush. "The Fringe Benefits Tax concessions are crucial for businesses in remote and rural Australia who provide accommodation to employees as part of their salary packages," she said in a statement. "Without these concessions, small outback businesses will not be able to attract workers." State Labor Member for the Pilbara Kevin Michel described the report as "a kick in the guts for regional residents".  "I'm totally disappointed with the Productivity Commission report. People don't seem to understand the cost of living up here in the Pilbara. "It recognises the current zone allowances aren't working properly and the inequalities that we face living in the region need to be fixed. "But at the same time it recommends abolishing the tax rebate, rather than trying to fix these inequalities. "The Commission should actually be asking for more tax concessions for people living in the Pilbara. "Living up here is not easy." WA Regional Affairs Minister Alannah MacTiernan said the fringe benefits tax housing exemption was vital in attracting workers the region. "The Pilbara is a major generator of wealth for the entire country and the fringe benefits tax exemption is indeed one of those things that is at least helping to create some balance, and going part way to addressing the problem of fly-in fly-out [workers]," she said. Shire of East Pilbara chief executive officer, Jeremy Edwards, said the council was very disappointed in the recommendations. "If the recommendations were implemented, it would have a huge financial impact on a shire like the Shire of East Pilbara," he said "The introduction of a 50 per cent rate for FBT on housing would cost the Shire $300,000 to $400,000 a year. "For a shire like ours we have to provide employee housing to attract people to come to this region and to put FTB on top of that would be a huge cost," he said. "To attract people to the regions, you do need to incentivise.  "Having a blanket statement that people want to move to the regions for lifestyle choices is true, but for somewhere like the Shire of East Pilbara and Newman we don't have a waterfront view, and it is really difficult. "So the remote area tax concessions and some of the incentives for people to live in the area is really warranted and it's needed to keep people in the regions." Mr Edwards said he is hopeful the proposal is gone for good. "It scared us a little bit, we are still going to advocate through our local members, and also Senator Dean Smith, we've spoken to him in relation to it," he said. "So we are just going to keep the pressure on and make sure the government doesn't implement something like this. "The news was welcome, but we just hope it doesn't come back and haunt us in the future." 
It's a vibrant democracy with a population roughly the size of Australia's, yet few Aussies could name its capital, let alone its newly re-elected female president. Fewer still have visited, despite the fact it's closer to our shores than Japan or America. By almost any measure Taiwan is a success story. Its population is highly educated and its annual GDP is greater than that of the Netherlands, Sweden or Norway. It has a strong manufacturing and electronics base  if you own an iPhone or an Xbox One, your device was made in a factory run by Foxconn, the giant Taiwanese electronics firm. Taiwan has a free and robust media environment, an extensive catalogue of national parks, a vibrant cultural sector, good food and world-class infrastructure. It also has strong progressive credentials: 42 per cent of legislators are women; six seats in the national parliament are reserved for indigenous representatives; it's the only Asian nation to have legislated same-sex marriage. On paper Taiwan reads like a model global citizen. But while it has many trading partners, it has very few international friends  at least, not ones prepared to stand beside it publicly. It's been decades since any Western leader has formally hosted a dinner for their Taiwanese counterpart, let alone arranged a joint photo opportunity. Despite it being a strategic US ally, America has no official embassy in the Taiwanese capital Taipei  nor does Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom or Germany. Taiwan is the sort of "friend" you're happy to chat with at a dimly lit party, just as long as no-one posts a photo of the two of you on Facebook. Taiwan's problem is that it lives in the shadow cast by its giant neighbour, the People's Republic of China (PRC). For decades China has run a concerted and successful diplomatic campaign to isolate and prostrate the Taiwanese nation. China holds one of the five permanent seats on the UN Security Council, giving it veto rights over all significant UN decisions. As a result, Taiwan finds itself in the unique position of being the only economically advanced, first-world country barred from membership of the United Nations and all other major international organisations. But a clear majority of Taiwanese are now demanding greater international recognition  even at the risk of turning their island into a battlefield. And there's a growing sense that China may have overplayed its hand. The Chinese Communist Party claims ownership of the island on two grounds. The first involves the ethnic make-up of the Taiwanese population. It's overwhelmingly Han  around 97 per cent. The second is based on the fact that Taiwan was once part of the Great Qing empire. In the 1950s Mao Zedong's red armies moved to conquer all lost Imperial possessions and bring them under Communist rule. That included Tibet and Xinjiang. But his troops failed to take Taiwan which, at the end of the brutal Chinese civil war, had become the last outpost of the former Nationalist government and its supporters. Ever since, Beijing has labelled Taiwan a "renegade province", ignoring the historic fact that Taiwan was never a part of the People's Republic of China and has functioned as an independent political entity for seven decades. For China's President Xi Jinping, Taiwan also represents a personal political inconvenience. "It puts the lie to the Chinese Communist Party notion that Chinese culture, Chinese civilisation, does not accord with democracy," says the American Enterprise Institute's Michael Mazza. "It acts as a potential shining light on the hill for people in China who are interested in a freer future." But why have Western countries allowed Taiwan to be isolated? In the early 1970s the governments of both Taiwan (then a dictatorship) and the PRC refused to accept each other's legitimacy. Each claimed sovereignty over both sides of the Taiwan Strait.  Eventually recognition of the PRC's size and potential military might won the day and Taipei lost its seat at the UN to its rival. But Macquarie University's Roger Lee Huang says there's another major factor at play when it comes to any attempt to formally bring Taiwan back into the international fold. "Clearly Australia is very reliant on the Chinese economy," says Dr Huang, who once worked for the Democratic Progressive Party in Taiwan. "With China being Australia's largest trading partner Australia has been very cautious with anything related to China. Taiwan clearly is one of the big issues there." After 36 years of ties, Solomon Islands ended relations with Taiwan. What did it cost Beijing to win over the Pacific nation's old friend, and what might it mean for stability in the region? And Beijing has not been reticent in making its displeasure known when any nation attempts to improve its relations with Taipei. "Taiwan and Australia were actually pretty close to creating a free-trade agreement a couple of years ago and China actively intervened and basically told Australia to stop," Dr Huang says. Dr Huang says there's also been a concerted campaign by Beijing to remove any reference to Taiwanese sovereignty from world affairs. At major sporting events, for instance, Taiwanese teams are forbidden to compete under their own name. Hence, when the Matildas recently played an Olympic qualifier against Taiwan, the Taiwanese national team was euphemistically referred to as "Chinese Taipei". In 2018 the Chinese Communist Party was also successful in forcing more than 40 international airlines, including Qantas, to change their naming protocols so that Taiwan would be identified as a Chinese territory not an independent nation. Despite the pressure, Taiwan has survived and thrived. In the third quarter of 2019, the island nation jumped ahead of both Singapore and South Korea to record an economic growth rate of 2.9 per cent. What's most apparent when visiting Taiwan is how ordinary it is  ordinary in the sense of normal, everyday, functional. Unlike in mainland China, the police and military don't maintain a high public profile. During January's national election campaign there was no obvious sense of heightened security. In fact, campaigning often had a distinctly carnival feeling to it, with candidates using loud hailers, flashing lights and music to attract attention as they drove through the streets of Taipei in open vehicles. The election marked a significant turning point in Taiwan's democratic development with a record 57 per cent of the electorate voting overwhelmingly for Tsai Ing-wen's Democratic Progressive Party, giving her a second term. In so doing, they rejected the main opposition party, the Kuomintang (KMT), which was widely seen by analysts as being far more pro-Beijing. "The KMT must convince the general public that it only engages the mainland for the purposes of creating peace, and that it would never sell out Taiwan," senior party figure Chang Ya-chung acknowledged in a radio interview after the event. Dr Tsai consistently campaigned on the need for Taiwan to be less reliant on economic relations with mainland China (its major trading partner, despite the tensions) and to broaden its trade arrangements with other Asian democracies like Japan and South Korea. Professor Frank Cheng-shan Liu, from Taiwan's National Sun Yat-Sen University, says while that proved persuasive with the electorate, voters were also influenced by the solidarity and concern they felt for the pro-democracy protestors in Hong Kong. "Taiwanese people don't ignore the market potential of mainland China, but last summer changed a lot of people's perspectives," he says. Beijing has long talked about forcing Taiwan to become part of China under a Hong Kong-style "one country, two systems" arrangement, but the heavy-handed way in which protesters were dealt with in Hong Kong made Taiwanese voters uneasy, according to Professor Liu. "The Hong Kong situation actually shrank the people's positive belief that economic opportunities [with China] are the priority," he says. January's election also confirmed the existence of a demographic shift in the way ordinary Taiwanese see themselves and their national identity. Previous generations of Taiwanese, especially those who fled the mainland in the late 1940s to escape Communist rule, still saw themselves as essentially Chinese. But young people today, says Professor Liu, now identify overwhelmingly as "Taiwanese" not Chinese. "President Tsai reflected very well the new consensus to include Taiwan in their identity," he says. "To attract the younger generation's belief that she is the protector of Taiwan." Dr Huang believes Beijing may have underestimated the intelligence and political skill of the quietly-spoken Dr Tsai, a seasoned campaigner who holds a doctorate from the London School of Economics. While Beijing regularly threatens war and accuses Taiwan's leadership of being reckless separatists, she has been measured in her criticism of Beijing. In her election night speech Dr Tsai spoke of the need to make peace, parity, democracy and dialogue the watchwords of all future Beijing-Taipei relations. "Positive cross-strait interactions founded in mutual respect are the best way to serve our peoples," she said. "All countries should consider Taiwan a partner, not an issue." In an interview with the BBC several days after the election she was specifically asked about Beijing's threat of conflict if she and her government move to declare formal independence. In her response, she turned the proposition on its head. "We don't have a need to declare ourselves an independent state," she replied.  "We are an independent country already. We have a separate identity and we're a country of our own. We deserve respect from China." China's Government has made little effort to conceal its dislike of Taiwan's President Tsai Ing-wen, and her landslide re-election is a massive blow to Xi Jinping, writes Bill Birtles. Dr Huang argues Xi Jinping's aggressive and highly-nationalistic style of politics may now be backfiring. Broadly speaking, he says, the international community has learnt not to trust the Chinese government, pointing to events in Hong Kong as well as recent concerns over the PRC's handling of the current coronavirus outbreak. "I think China might have overplayed its hand in the last couple of years," he says. And he argues this month's visit to Washington by Taiwan's vice-president elect, William Lai Ching-te, could be emblematic of a nascent shift in global sentiment. "Traditional allies and friends of Taiwan, countries that obviously share similar values, are now finally awakening again," he says. Although unofficial, Mr Lai attended various events and met with many senior political figures including the powerful Speaker of the House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi. And there are other tentative signs of a global warming toward Taiwan. In response to concerns over the spread of the coronavirus, both the prime ministers of Japan and Canada publicly voiced their support for Taiwan's inclusion in the World Health Organisation. Professor Liu believes a lot will depend on how skilfully Dr Tsai manages the growing national assertiveness of the Taiwanese people. Dr Tsai has spoken openly about the pressure she's felt from elements within her party who want her to now go further in asserting the country's sovereignty. Professor Liu worries that tensions could escalate if politicians on both sides of the Taiwan Strait can't compromise. But Dr Huang doubts Beijing wants war. "The party's main concern remains political stability in China," he says. "If the People's Liberation Army can't deliver a decisive, quick victory this will most likely weaken the CCP's legitimacy within China." In the US, both sides of politics have reaffirmed their commitment to ensuring the Taiwanese military is well armed and prepared for any possible Chinese incursion. How the wider international community would respond to cross-strait conflict remains unclear. The Chinese military has tested waters in recent months by sending a jet fighter briefly into Taiwanese airspace and by undertaking two separate naval convoys through the Taiwan Strait. But it's worth noting that for all her talk of peace, Dr Tsai has been unequivocal in stating her administration's attitude to war. "Invading Taiwan is something that will be very costly for China," she told the BBC. "Maintaining a 'status quo' remains our policy. I think that is a very friendly gesture to China." Get more stories that go beyond the news cycle with our weekly newsletter. 
Tesla's Autopilot driving system steered an electric vehicle into a concrete barrier on a California freeway in a fatal 2018 crash because it was operating under conditions it could not handle, a US investigation has found. The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) also ruled that the car's driver, an engineer for Apple, was distracted by playing a game on his iPhone. The NTSB made the findings on Tuesday and provided nine recommendations to prevent crashes of partially automated vehicles in the future.  Among them was that technology companies design smartphones so they do not operate if they are within a driver's reach, apart from cases of emergency. The hearing in Washington DC focused on the March 2018 crash of a Tesla Model X SUV that killed engineer Walter Huang. The 38-year-old was playing a game on his iPhone rather than holding the steering wheel. Autopilot was engaged when the vehicle swerved and slammed into a concrete barrier dividing freeway and exit lanes at a speed of 113 kilometres per hour. Drivers can avoid holding the steering wheel for extended periods while using Autopilot, but Tesla recommends keeping hands on the wheel and paying attention. The board criticised Tesla in its findings, saying that if it did not add driver-monitoring safeguards, misuse of Autopilot was expected "and the risk for future crashes will remain". The NTSB can only make recommendations, while the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) regulates US vehicles. It said it would carefully review the recommendations. The NHTSA has opened investigations into 14 Tesla crashes in which Autopilot is suspected of being in use, but has taken no action against the company. "It's time to stop enabling drivers in any partially automated vehicle to pretend that they have driverless cars. Because they don't have driverless cars," NTSB chairman Robert Sumwalt said. According to the NTSB, regulators place limitations on Autopilot use in Europe where Tesla issues alerts for hands-off driving within 15 seconds. Tesla, whose Autopilot has been tied to at least three fatal crashes since 2016, did not respond to requests for comment. The company has previously said the system was put out initially in "beta," meaning it was being tested and improved as bugs were identified, the NTSB was told. Mr Sumwalt said Tesla  unlike five other car manufacturers  had ignored NTSB safety recommendations issued in 2017. The NTSB said it would soon release a review of a Tesla Autopilot fatal crash in March 2019 in Florida that showed no evidence the driver's hands were on the steering wheel in the final eight seconds before the car struck a truck. Mr Sumwalt added that the problem of driver distraction due to smartphones would keep spreading if nothing was done.  "If we don't get on top of it, it's going to be a coronavirus," Mr Sumwalt said. AP/Reuters 
Desiree Sheets-Chavolla works as a cleaner at Sydney Airport. She currently does an average of 26 hours a week but would like to work more. "I'm constantly having to ask for extra work," she told 7.30. "They've created like a shark tank for us  we have to fight for any overtime." Ms Sheets-Chavolla is not alone. Exclusive market research for 7.30 shows almost 1.2 million people were underemployed last year and the problem is only predicted to get worse. Roy Morgan Research analysed 15 years of research and found the number of underemployed people had jumped almost 450,000 since 2005. The research is based on thousands of face-to-face interviews conducted across the country each month. CEO Michele Levine said an increasing number of workers were frustrated about being trapped in part-time work. "Essentially what they're saying is they've got a part-time job, but they would really like to be working more hours," she told 7.30. "Part-time jobs are growing at a faster rate than full-time jobs. And clearly, when you have part-time jobs, you have a lot of those people would prefer to have more work, they'd prefer to have a full-time job." According to the Roy Morgan research, 8.7 per cent of the workforce is underemployed, slightly higher than the Australian Bureau of Statistics' (ABS) official figure of 8.5 per cent. And you are more likely to be underemployed if you are a woman, a worker in your teens or 20s, or you work in three industries where part-time work is common. The recreation and personal sector, which includes hospitality and fitness workers, is the industry with the highest underemployment, at 20 per cent, followed closely by retail with over 19 per cent underemployment, and community services, which includes teachers and carers, at 10.5 per cent. For Ms Sheets-Chavolla, the lack of work makes it difficult to make ends meet. "I struggle to pay my bills, I struggle to pay my mortgage," she said. That means she puts off fixing essentials like her broken hot water heater which is leaking water. Despite a 50-kilometre commute to the airport for shifts as short as four hours, Ms Sheets-Chavolla has taken on a second cleaning job but says it isn't enough to fill the financial shortfall. "It doesn't come easy because you're always robbing from Peter to pay Paul and you're always waiting for that next payday and its very stressful," she said. Roy Morgan's Ms Levine said the economy would benefit from people having extra work if they wanted it. "We're under-utilising the potential of our people to be doing meaningful work," she said. "That in itself is a bad thing, that holds the economy back. "If more people were actually working and working as many hours as they wanted to, they'd have more money to spend, and that of course, feeds the economy." The ABS uses a strict definition to calculate its unemployment and underemployment statistics so that it can compare Australia's results with that of other countries. A person is counted as being employed if they work one hour a week. Ndonde Fikiri enjoys her part-time in retail but she wants to work more. Her shifts can be as short as three hours. "A three-hour shift, that's like barely $50," she told 7.30. "Sometimes it takes about $6 to go and come back from work. It's just not enough." She has been going door-to-door to retail outlets, handing out her resume in a search for more work. She's not having much luck. "Only one of the retailers accepted my resume," she said. "[The search] continues." Ms Fikiri is trying to save enough to pay for a business degree at university. "I have to pay for my own uni, and I just can't sit around and wait, getting three-hour shifts per day." "How am I ever going to pay $4,000 a semester? I need a job." According to Jeff Borland, a professor of economics at the University of Melbourne, there has been a significant shift to part-time work over decades, which is causing the spike in underemployment. "Underemployment really is a part-time work phenomenon," he told 7.30. "Back in the mid-1960s, for example, only about 10 per cent of jobs were part-time then and the rate of underemployment was 1 per cent. "So, only one in 100 workers in the labour force then said that they were underemployed. "Nowadays with part-time employment, it's about a third of the labour force." He said even the well-educated were finding it harder to land full-time work. "Whereas 10-15 years ago, if you had a degree and wanted a full-time job, you're pretty likely to get that straight away, now it's about a quarter of people who get a graduate degree, three months after they graduate are doing part-time work, and it's taking them several years to get the full-time job they want." Professor Borland predicts underemployment is likely to get worse, particularly after hits to the economy from this summer's bushfire and the coronavirus outbreak. He said the Morrison Government should look at budget stimulus to try and combat the issue. "The signs are that part-time employment will continue to grow," he said. "If you extrapolate past trends and taking account of the likelihood of some weakening in the Australian economy, it is quite likely that underemployment will continue to rise." For airport worker Desiree Sheets-Chavolla, underemployment is a worrying trend that makes her worry about the future for her children. "It's grim. You know, it's sad to see that that's where this world is going," she said. "We want to make it better in the future. "We want people to have full-time jobs and it's just not going that way." 
A Chinese court has sentenced Chinese-born Swedish citizen Gui Minhai to 10 years in jail for illegally providing intelligence overseas, prompting a protest from Stockholm. Gui, a bookseller previously based in Hong Kong who sold books critical of China's political leadership, was detained by mainland police in 2018.  He was seized while with Swedish diplomats on a Beijing-bound train. Relations between Sweden and China soured in the months leading up to the sentencing, with Chinese officials warning Swedish counterparts against meddling in China's internal affairs. Sweden summoned the Chinese ambassador to Stockholm to protest against the sentence and demand Gui's release. "We have summoned China's ambassador to our cabinet secretary and again demanded the release of, and consular access to, our citizen," a foreign ministry spokesman told Reuters. Swedish Foreign Minister Ann Linde said Gui should be released, a position Sweden has held throughout. "We also require access to our citizen to provide the consular support he is entitled to," Ms Linde said. "We have not had access to or knowledge of any trial. Thus, we have not been able to review the indictment nor been able to offer access to legal counsel," she said. A statement by the Ningbo Intermediate People's Court, which jailed Gui, said the 55-year-old had stated that he would not appeal the sentence and had asked to have his Chinese citizenship reinstated. A spokesman for China's foreign ministry told a news briefing that Gui's rights and interests had been fully guaranteed. He said consular visits, in general, were put on hold due to the coronavirus outbreak. Chinese officials objected to Svenska PEN, a literary organisation, awarding Gui the 2019 Tucholsky Prize, praising his services to free speech. The complicated conflict broken down in simple terms to help you get a handle on what's going on  Swedish Culture Minister Amanda Lind defied Chinese diplomatic threats of "countermeasures" to present the prize. Gui is the highest-profile of five booksellers who disappeared between October and December 2015, all linked to a Hong Kong bookshop known for its gossipy texts on Chinese political leaders. Such books are banned on the mainland but their production and sale are legal in Hong Kong under freedoms guaranteed as part of the 1997 handover from British colonial rule to Chinese sovereignty. Gui was initially abducted in the Thai beach resort of Pattaya in 2015 before surfacing, like the others, in detention in mainland China.  He was released in October 2017, before being arrested in January 2018. Three of his colleagues were detained in mainland China while another was widely thought to have been abducted in Hong Kong and spirited across the border. Gui is the only one to have remained in detention. His daughter Angela, along with other supporters, has repeatedly called for his release, saying he is a victim of illegal political persecution.  Reuters 
Climate activist Greta Thunberg has accused European Union governments and institutions of only "pretending" to urgently tackle the climate crisis. EU leaders say they are spearheading some of the most ambitious climate change policies in the world, and on Wednesday the bloc's executive unveiled a planned climate law to reduce net greenhouse gas emissions to zero by 2050. "When your house is on fire, you don't wait a few more years to start putting it out," Ms Thunberg told the European Parliament's environment committee. "And yet this is what the [European] Commission is proposing today." The 17-year-old Swedish activist said that, by fixing its climate law around an emissions target three decades in the future, the EU was ignoring reality. Greta Thunberg inspired a global movement for climate action, but some haven't welcomed her message. "Here you are, trying to create laws and policies once again ignoring it. Pretending that your plan or policy disregarding the united science will somehow solve the biggest crisis humanity has ever faced," she said. "Pretending that a law that no one has to follow  is a law. Pretending that you can be a climate leader and still go on building and subsidising new fossil fuel infrastructure," Ms Thunberg said, drawing applause from European lawmakers. The climate law would give the executive Commission powers to set tougher goals for governments every five years. But these powers would only kick in after 2030  too late, according to environment groups. "We will not be satisfied with anything less than a science-based pathway which gives us the best possible chance to safeguard the future living conditions for humanity and life on earth as we know it," Ms Thunberg said. The EU accounts for less than 10 per cent of the world's greenhouse gas emissions. But Ms Thunberg said the bloc had a moral obligation to lead the way, because developed economies that have been polluting for longest should cut emissions first and fastest. The European Parliament has banned external visitors for the next three weeks as a precaution against the fast-spreading coronavirus, but waived its own rule for Ms Thunberg's visit. Ms Thunberg is in Brussels this week to meet EU leaders and lead a climate school strike on Friday. "For over one-and-a-half years we have been sacrificing our education to protest against your inaction," Ms Thunberg said. She began missing school in 2018 to sit outside the Swedish parliament in a solitary protest. Since then, Ms Thunberg has galvanised a global movement of young people, inspiring millions to take to the streets to demand that world leaders act urgently to tackle the climate crisis. Reuters/AP 
Australia's economy is facing some of its biggest threats in a generation. This time last year the economy was already struggling. Business activity outside the mining sector was sluggish at best and shoppers were reluctant to spend at the stores. Years of low wage growth, high levels of personal debt and job insecurity were already taking a toll. Fast forward to the end of the year and add to that a severe drought, a disastrous bushfire season and rising unemployment, and you have an economy slowing down to a worryingly low pace. That's why when the threat of a pandemic hit global headlines, share markets sold off  companies looking for higher profits in a sluggish economy were forced to completely overhaul their earnings guidance. Today's GDP data won't factor in the threat of the spread of the coronavirus and its impact on business and the economy, but it will highlight how vulnerable the economy was late last year before it was hit with the threat of a pandemic. Let's look at some of the key components of GDP leading into today's national accounts release. Australia relies heavily on international trade for economic growth. According to the Bureau of Statistics, the current account surplus, seasonally adjusted, fell by 85 per cent to $955 million in the December quarter 2019. This shows Australia's trade position deteriorated materially towards the end of last year. NAB's chief economist Alan Oster told the ABC's PM program this was a "reflection of lower commodities prices and lower demand for exports". Net exports and government spending were both expected to contribute less than expected to GDP in the December quarter, said AMP Capital's chief economist Shane Oliver. "Net exports and public demand [government spending] are each expected to contribute a smaller-than-expected 0.1 percentage points to December quarter GDP growth," he said. Shoppers and consumer spending generate the bulk of economic growth. But Australian retail turnover fell 0.5 percentage points in December 2019. This follows a rise of 1 per cent in November 2019, said Ben James, the director of Quarterly Economy Wide Surveys at the ABS. "The December fall comes after a strong November, led by Black Friday sales," he said. The outlook for the first quarter of this year, according to economists, is for more tight purse strings. Spending by businesses has also been lacklustre. Businesses spending on equipment, plant and machinery rose 0.8 per cent in the December quarter. Spending on new factories and building was quite poor though, down 5.9 per cent. Businesses remain reluctant to spend and certainly do not possess the "animal spirits" the Reserve Bank governor, Philip Lowe said he wants to see. Ahead of the GDP announcement, three of Australia's leading economists shared their views on where the economy was heading. Mr Oster said the December quarter would see "moderate growth, but not great". He expected GDP growth to come in at a very modest 0.3 percentage points. He said the economy should start to improve by April but "all our data suggests that things are getting worse". NAB said there was now an increased chance of a recession in 2020. However, Mr Oliver was more pessimistic. "We have revised down our December quarter GDP growth forecast to zero or 1.6 per cent year on year (from plus 0.3 quarter on quarter)," he wrote in a note. "There is a risk that it could be negative, even before the bushfires and coronavirus likely knocked the economy backwards in the current quarter." This would mean, assuming the current quarter sees a contraction in economic growth, that Australia's economy is currently in recession. A technical recession is defined as two consecutive quarters of negative GDP growth. Chances of a recession were increasing, according to BIS Oxford Economics chief economist Sarah Hunter. "Definitely much higher now than they were two weeks ago," she said. "The probability of a recession this year is definitely higher and increasing as the [coronavirus] outbreak spreads to more parts of the world and doesn't show any signs of slowing." 
Collapsed department store chain Harris Scarfe has found a buyer in the Spotlight Group, but the future of its remaining stores and staff remains unclear. The 170-year-old retailer called in the administrators in December, just a month after it was acquired by private equity firm Allegro Funds. The number of Harris Scarfe stores has been reduced from 66 to 44 in the months since, and job cuts reduced employee numbers from more than 1,800 to around 1,300. The coronavirus outbreak is expected to cost the Australian economy billions, with the second-order impact to be felt across supply chains, as many factories remain closed in China. Receivers from Deloitte Restructuring Services have granted the Spotlight group exclusive rights to buy the business, after four parties were shortlisted. The Spotlight Group runs the eponymous chain of fabric and craft stores, as well as camping and outdoor brands Mountain Designs and Anaconda. The receivers said they were "seeking to secure the ongoing employment" of the remaining staff members. "We are hopeful all of the 44 stores will be retained under the sale but ultimately, this will be dependent on how the transaction progresses over the next couple of weeks," receiver Vaughan Strawbridge said. Harris Scarfe is one of a growing list of retail casualties in recent months, including accessories brand Colette and clothing chains Jeanswest and Bardot, which all shut down some of their stores after entering administration. After closing a quarter of its stores and making more than 260 employees redundant, Jeanswest was last week sold to Harbour Guidance, the subsidiary of a Hong Kong company run by the same family that previously owned it. The already-struggling retail sector has had a tough start to the year, with a horror bushfire season impacting domestic travel and spending in fire-affected areas and the coronavirus outbreak disrupting supply chains. The latest ANZ-Roy Morgan survey showed consumer confidence fell 3.2 per cent last week, to be at its lowest in more than five years. "The virus-induced sell-off in the local and global stock markets and the big drop in [Chinese manufacturing] likely contributed to the weakness," ANZ's head of Australian economics David Plank said. Respondents' views of current economic conditions dropped sharply, by more than 16 per cent, but there was more positivity around personal finances. "So far the negative economic outlook has been a better guide to household spending than more positive financial sentiment," Mr Plank said. The receivers for Harris Scarfe said they expected to finalise the sale to Spotlight as early as mid-April. 
As the coronavirus works its way across the globe, the possibility that the Olympics will be postponed for the first time since World War II seems real. Meanwhile, a more routine spectre hovers over the five-ringed circus  the notion that some of the greatest performances produced on the grand Olympic stage are not real. Even before the 1988 Seoul Games  where Ben Johnson was so juiced up his eyes leaked stanozolol when he watched a sad movie  we were accustomed to the possibility the highest-profile Olympic performances were a pharmaceutical hoax. From the bearded female shot putters of the Cold War era to the more recent disgrace of countries such as Russia, we have been conditioned to the notion of systematic cheating  especially when it came from the other side of the geopolitical fence. But now, more often, we see but do not quite believe even some of the most romantic tales from the Olympics. There was no more heart-warming moment at the 2012 London Olympics than when Mo Farah celebrated his victories in the 5,000 metres and 10,000 metres before a euphoric crowd with his endearing Mobot gesture. As Cathy Freeman celebrated her Indigenous Australian heritage in Sydney 12 years earlier and allowed us to share her pride, Farah symbolised the joys of Britain's multicultural society against the rising tide of the navel-gazing nationalism that would soon deliver Brexit. To be in London's Olympic stadium when Farah twice breasted the tape was to see Great Britain briefly united in purpose and celebration. Which is why the suspicion surrounding Farah since his long-time coach Alberto Salazar was suspended for four years for "orchestrating and facilitating prohibited doping", creates such trepidation. The BBC's investigative program Panorama aired an episode titled "Mo Farah and the Salazar Scandal" earlier this week, which included admissions that the four-time Olympic gold medallist Farah used a performance-enhancing substance, although not necessarily in banned quantities. The crux of the accusation against Farah is that he was injected with L-carnitine before the 2014 London Marathon on Salazar's instructions. L-carnitine is a naturally occurring amino acid that the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) has banned in dosages of more than 50ml in the space of six hours. There has been no accusation made or evidence produced that Farah used more L-carnitine than is allowed before the London Marathon or any other event. But Farah's initial denial he used the substance and the circumstances surrounding its administration arouse suspicion. Farah's case came to light during the United States Anti-Doping Agency's (USADA) investigation into Salazar, the head of the Nike Oregon Project where Farah trained throughout his two successful Olympic campaigns. Since Salazar's conviction the British champion has suffered guilt by association, unfairly so in some eyes given there has been no evidence his four Olympic gold medals are tainted. But it has now been revealed that during a five-hour interview with USADA in London, Farah repeatedly denied using L-Carnitine before the London Marathon, only to change his story after a conversation with UK Athletics head of endurance Barry Fudge minutes after leaving the interview room. Fudge, it transpired, had travelled to Switzerland on Salazar's instructions to collect L-carnitine from the coach's supplier, an extremely unusual task for a British coach that had not been disclosed in previous enquiries. Last year, Farah strongly criticised the media, who he claimed was unfairly destroying his reputation because of his association with Salazar. But while none of the dots assembled by Panorama condemned Farah, when they are put together they create  at best  some confusion around Farah's credibility. Farah's lawyers have issued a statement in which they claim he was "one of the most tested athletes in the UK, if not the world" and that "interviews are not memory tests". But the Lance Armstrong case has diminished the "I've been tested hundreds of times" defence, given that investigation  rather than the testing often successfully dodged by many drug cheats  is now the most common means of nailing high-profile dopers. To some in British track and field, Farah already stands accused of breaching the "spirit of the sport" by his use of L-carnitine. The distance star's defenders might quite understandably respond that athletes who are being asked to follow both the literal WADA guideline around the use of supplements and this more ethereal "spirit of sport" code, are intolerably burdened. But, sadly, we live in an age where the innocence of sport has been lost. A time symbolised by the millions of now long-discarded yellow Livestrong wristbands and the hatches constructed in the Russian laboratories from which tainted drug samples were smuggled. This does not justify a rush to judgement of those such as Farah, who is so far accused only of using an amino acid that is legal in small quantities. On the contrary, Farah's case should for now remind us to be careful that the natural scepticism created by so many fallen heroes is not overtaken by the wilful blindness of outright cynicism. We must also avoid blind parochialism. The cloud hovering over some of British sport's most meritorious and raucously celebrated sporting achievements, including those of its storied cyclists, might seem ironic to those Australians who heard the chants of the English crowds during the last Ashes series  "Same old Aussies, always cheating". But in modern sport, if you throw the doping stone, you can very quickly find yourself in a glasshouse. 
Sydney's train network was thrown into chaos this morning with major delays on several lines after a work car derailed near Circular Quay. Workers in a ute, which had been modified to drive on the rails, were inspecting the track early this morning when the vehicle derailed on the City Circle line between Circular Quay and Wynyard. "It slipped off the rail, it jammed itself and it took our emergency crews to jack it up," Sydney Trains boss Stewart Mills said. The maintenance vehicle was removed about 7:18am and services resumed on the City Circle shortly after. Mr Mills said about 130 services were impacted, but very few were cancelled. Since then, he said, it had been a "complicated recovery". The worst-affected services were for commuters travelling from Western Sydney, the north shore and the airport. Impacted lines included the T2 Inner West and Leppington, T3 Bankstown and T8 Airport and South Line. Even after the morning rush, delays were still being felt, with trains between Circular Quay and Parramatta arriving up to 75 minutes late. Sydney Trains expects trains to be running to timetable for the afternoon commute. Frustrated commuters took to social media to vent about the delays. "Left my house at 6am. Start work in 4 mins at 8 and I'm not even close to getting there any time soon. Just another day on Sydney Trains," one person tweeted. Sydney's train system relies significantly on the City Circle, and incidents there can have massive flow-on effects on lines elsewhere. Mr Mills apologised for the delays, describing a string of recent disruptions as "unprecedented". "We've had some really difficult, exceptional circumstances over the last month," he said. "Whether it's exceptional record heat, to the storms, that is just unprecedented over the network." The price of ride share apps surged amid the chaos, with one commuter travelling 9km from Petersham to Martin Place claiming they were quoted a fare of $85. In a tweet, Sydney Trains encouraged commuters to consider using the city's light rail lines, which run between Dulwich Hill in the inner west, Randwick in the eastern suburbs, and Central. One passenger replied: "Looking forward to that light rail service in Riverwood. How long is it going to take to get here?" Mr Mills said no-one was injured during the derailment incident. There were also delays on the North Shore's line after a trespasser disrupted services at Central earlier this morning. 
Zann Nelson was having lunch with a friend when she suddenly started bleeding. In the bathroom, it looked like a heavy period, which made no sense, given she had not menstruated in a decade. Panic began bubbling up inside her as she rushed to see a doctor. Not only was she suddenly grappling with her own mortality, Zann was also terrified about what it could cost. Like millions of other Americans, she had no health insurance and in the land of the free there is only a very limited safety net. Medical bills are a big contributor to personal bankruptcy cases. "Before I was diagnosed, they handed me a little piece of paper to sign," Zann said. "The surgeon told me, 'don't worry about the money, we need to focus on your health,' and I thought, OK great, they're going to help me."  The diagnosis was uterine cancer and the surgeon's solution was a radical hysterectomy to remove Zann's uterus before the growth spread. The operation was a success. But within weeks, a series of bills began appearing in the mail  some from imaging, some from doctors and some from the hospital itself. The total cost of $45,000 was far more than Zann could afford, even on a monthly payment plan. She was sued by the local health system and fought back in court, but ultimately lost the case. The hospital put a claim on her family farm where Zann had lived most of her life, and she had to sell land to pay back the debt. "My case all came down to that little piece of paper with tiny writing, which was a contract," she said. "They denied not telling me about the cost and saying the things they did. The judge actually stated that I could have chosen to refuse the surgery." Stories like Zann's are a big reason healthcare is the top issue for many voters in this US election year. In 2019, one study found about 137 million Americans had faced some sort of financial stress due to medical costs.  The price of insurance has dominated debates between the Democrats vying to become Donald Trump's opponent in November. Even those with coverage who work full time are not immune from crippling, surprise bills. Amanda Sturgill is still thousands of dollars in debt due to co-payments from her teenage daughter's back surgery four years ago. "My daughter Makayla was getting my youngest child out of the bath and suddenly she had the worst pain she'd ever felt in her life," Amanda said. After various tests, doctors finally diagnosed Makayla with degenerative disc disease and recommended an operation. Amanda earns about $18 an hour and because she was insured through her employer, assumed she would be OK. But she was not prepared for all the out-of-pocket costs, and after falling behind, a sheriff turned up at her house with a court summons.  She was being sued for about $3,800. Amanda is currently going through a divorce and raising four children. Due to her debt payment plan and her daughter's ongoing treatment costs, there are weeks when she struggles to make ends meet. "It's very stressful. I ration medication. I've sold every piece of jewellery that I have. I have nothing left," Amanda said. "A lot of times, I'll go all day long and I won't eat, I save food for the kids." In a last-ditch effort to turn their financial situation around, some Americans file for bankruptcy. The precise number of medical bankruptcies is hotly disputed because people usually have multiple financial issues when they file, but lawyers say healthcare costs are a common factor. "About half of my cases each month have medical bills as a large factor. Usually those clients don't have health insurance or they have bad health insurance," bankruptcy lawyer Marshall Slayton said.  Mr Slayton said more Americans appeared to be forgoing health insurance altogether. "What you see is people take a risk. They say it's more important for me to put food on the table and have a car  than have health insurance," he said. "For some people, the gamble works out and for some people, it doesn't."  Academics have long warned the high price of care can have social consequences too. Right now, as authorities work to prevent the spread of the deadly coronavirus around the United States, there are concerns some uninsured people with mild cases may not seek treatment, due to the potential cost. The Miami Herald reported that one man who developed symptoms after returning from China in January could now owe thousands, after getting tested for coronavirus in hospital and being diagnosed with just the flu. All the Democrats trying to win the party's presidential nomination have put forward plans to reduce the risk of surprise medical bills. Former vice-president Joe Biden wants to expand the existing Affordable Care Act  which is also known as Obamacare  to include more Americans, further subsidise insurance premiums and drive down the cost of medicine. But current frontrunner Bernie Sanders is promising a universal, publicly funded Medicare For All insurance program that would cover all US residents with virtually no out-of-pocket costs. It would be a more generous health system than Australia's, even including free dental coverage. It would also reduce the number of uninsured Americans from about 8.8 per cent to nearly zero. Although the total price and net impact on national health expenditure are currently being ferociously debated, many forecasters predict it would cost the US Government roughly $46 trillion over a decade. "That's a reasonable middle estimate in a big range," said Marc Goldwein from the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, a Washington DC-based thinktank. "To put that in context, you'd have to double all income taxes or essentially double the national debt to pay for that." Some Democrats fear campaigning on Medicare For All at a general election could be politically tricky and it seemingly has little chance of getting through Congress unchanged. The healthcare industry is incredibly influential and for Americans with good insurance, the quality of care they receive is world class. "America currently attracts the best and brightest doctors and specialists from around the world because they earn very good wages," said Ge Bai from Johns Hopkins Carey Business School. "Research and medical discoveries here save lives everywhere and some in the industry fear Medicare for All could slow that innovation." But both Zann Nelson and Amanda Sturgill say something has to change in the coming years to ensure fewer people end up in their situation. Zann is a lifelong Democrat and is hoping a moderate like Joe Biden will win the White House this year. "You just have to look around the world to know that our health system does not make sense," she said at her farm north of Charlottesville. "It's a human right to be healthy and I think we should work on improving Obamacare." Amanda is likely to back self-described Democratic socialist Bernie Sanders, largely because of his Medicare For All plan. She even recently decided to appear in advertisements promoting the policy. Her family lives in a former coal mining area, near the border of Virginia, Tennessee and Kentucky, a region that is pro-Donald Trump. "I voted for [Republican President] George W Bush. I change my vote," she said. "People here hate Democrats but I think they hate Bernie Sanders a bit less. He thinks about working Americans." 
Sydney retiree Van Kham Chau has lost his final appeal against his 12-year jail sentence in Vietnam on terrorism charges. Chau, 70, has been in jail for more than a year, after being found guilty of terrorist activities in what human rights groups have described as a sham trial against a political prisoner. The retired baker is a member of the human rights organisation Viet Tan, which the Vietnamese Government says is a terrorist organisation. In his final remarks during the appeal, Chau said although he was an Australian citizen, he had never forgotten his Vietnamese roots, and he had no reason to join a reactionary terrorist group that would act against the Vietnamese people.  "I love my homeland Vietnam and my people  I want my country to grow, the people [to] live with freedom and democracy," he said.  "I have never [done] anything to harm my people, even my captors who detained me. "I admit that I have made [a] mistake and admit my fault in entering Vietnam's territory with [the] identity card of another person. But during my short stay in Vietnam, I only had normal activities, nothing was terrorist."  Van Kham Chau, who fled Vietnam after the war, was investigated for a crime that carries the death penalty. Here's how his case unfolded. The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) said it was disappointed in the outcome and would continue to provide consular assistance to Chau and his family, including monitoring his health and wellbeing. "We are disappointed that Mr Chau's appeal has been unsuccessful. This marks the conclusion of his legal process," DFAT said in a statement to the ABC. "Vietnamese authorities understand our strong interest in his health and welfare. Australian officials have raised Mr Chau's case and will continue to do so. "We are concerned about the length of Mr Chau's sentence, particularly given his health and welfare may be severely impacted by serving such a sentence at his age." Elaine Pearson from Human Rights Watch said Chau and his two co-defendants, Tran Van Quyen and Nguyen Van Vien were convicted due to their affiliation with Viet Tan, "which has explicitly rejected violence but supports democracy and political participation in Vietnam". "They are the latest victims in a spiralling crackdown on dissent and free speech within Vietnam  they are among hundreds of political prisoners who are currently detained." She called on Minister for Foreign Affairs Marise Payne to speak out about Chau's case, saying it raised many concerns about due process. "The Australian Government should redouble its efforts to press strongly for Chau's return to Australia. On some occasions, Vietnam has allowed political prisoners to be released into exile in Europe or the US but that will only happen if there is strong pressure from the Australian Government," she said. Chau was arrested in Ho Chi Minh City in January last year while meeting an activist from the Brotherhood for Democracy group and he was accused of entering the country through Cambodia on false documents. In November, he was sentenced to 12 years in prison after being convicted for holding a senior position in the New South Wales chapter of Viet Tan and for "financing terrorism". His wife, Trang Chau, told the ABC she was upset by the court's decision.  "I'm very sad," she said, adding her family and community deeply missed him after he had spent more than a year in prison. "I hope the Government can help us to get him back in Australia, because I am very scared." She stressed her husband "did not do something wrong, only [advocated for] human rights". "My husband is not a terrorist. He is a good man who wanted to do something for Vietnam," she said.  Chau's lawyer, Trinh Vinh Phuc, told the ABC he could still request a review of the judgement and a retrial, but said it was a long process for political cases like Chau's and the chances of success were close to zero. Chau's sister, who lives in Vietnam, was not permitted to observe the courtroom proceedings.  Cardiologist and fellow Viet Tan member Phong Nguyen said he hoped the rejection of Chau's appeal would open up a path for negotiation between the Australian and Vietnamese governments. "Mr Chau is of no use to them anymore  they sentenced him, [which] serves the purpose of basically instilling fear in anyone who speaks against the Government. That's a very harsh sentence," Dr Nguyen said.  "We detest the sentence, because there is no evidence of anything  that could be labelled as terrorism or financing terrorism. "We don't believe this is the end. This is a time when bilateral talks need to be increased, particularly on compassionate grounds  he is elderly and he has got illnesses." Australian consulate officials were unable to visit Chau in the past month due to COVID-19 but were able to observe his appeal proceedings on Monday. They were both arrested in the same week by communist regimes. But Australia's reaction to the cases of Yang Hengjun and Van Kham Chau couldn't be more different. The detention centre where Chau is being held in Ho Chi Minh City cancelled all consular visits for the month of February, and non-consular visits were being approved on a case-by-case basis.  Vietnam has recorded 16 cases of the novel coronavirus, but there have been no deaths and all patients have recovered, according to the Johns Hopkins University map tracking the spread of the outbreak.  Chau's lawyer Mr Phuc listed a number of health concerns Chau faced in prison, including prostate problems, recurring vertigo, severe back pain and high blood pressure.  Chau has also been hospitalised at least twice since his arrest. His son Daniel told the ABC his family were hoping to try and visit Chau in prison in the coming months. [It's taken a toll] on Mum especially," he said, adding that the emotional side of the case was on his mind daily.  "If I could speak to my dad, I'd wish him good luck, I hope he's OK. It's hard. I'm really concerned about his health. "I just want him home." After Chau's arrest and incarceration, Chau's youngest son, Dennis, became something of an accidental activist, highlighting his father's plight at the 12th Geneva Summit on Human Rights and Democracy last fortnight.  Dennis, who is based in the UK, said his father was held in a cell for 23 hours a day, with one hour of exercise permitted.  "His mental health is deteriorating," Dennis said. "We've made requests for family visitation, none of which have been granted." "My father turned 70 last year, and so with a 12-year sentence, he'll be 82 when he is released. It is effectively a death sentence." Dennis said his father went back to Vietnam out of a sense injustice and to advocate for the rights of people in his homeland, which he fled as a refugee in the early 1980s. "My father isn't a fool, he would've known of the dangers of returning to Vietnam, but he went anyway," he said.  "My father came to Australia with nothing but the clothes on his back as a refugee after the Vietnam War. He worked hard all his life to make something for him and his family in his new adopted home.  "He grew to be a proud Australian, proud of the freedoms we take for granted." Dennis went on to say that his father "felt for the people of Vietnam" who were deprived of the same freedoms.  "This is why he felt compelled to advocate and effect change," he said.  He called on Prime Minister Scott Morrison and the Australian Government to act.  "The Australian Government must be held to a higher standard, as a western democracy, to not put trade relations above basic human rights  the ones that we hold so dear," he said.  "As trading partners of Vietnam, you are also accountable for the treatment of its people  when you sign that trade agreement. "I'll be unwavering in my mission to keep my father's voice and story alive. "It is silence that breeds inaction. It is silence that lets these governments know that it is OK to continue with their ways." 
Could we face a mass extinction of human beings in our lifetime?    As global temperatures rise and this summer's bushfires devastate the Australian landscape, it's a worst-case scenario that is beginning to be seriously discussed. The rapid spread of the coronavirus in recent weeks has also escalated the anxiety that people feel about their mortality.   However, there seems to be a difference in the way the public has reacted to these two threats. Global warming and potential mass extinction are seen as a vague threat somewhere out there in the distant future, whereas coronavirus is viewed as a clear and imminent danger. The growing fear of a coronavirus pandemic appears to have quickly motivated Australian health authorities and governments into immediate and appropriate action. By comparison, the anxiety around global warming and potential mass extinction seems muted. Things came to a head at dinner one night earlier this year, when my girlfriend suggested the chat was too depressing. She believed in climate change, she just didn't see the point of being so negative. A report written by Paul Gilding, a fellow at the University of Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership, and commissioned by the Breakthrough National Centre for Climate Restoration, put forward the view that there is a "high likelihood of human civilisation coming to an end in 2050" if action is not taken to curb climate change. Climate change deniers will typically denounce any discussion of mass extinction as histrionic doomsday talk, while some climate change believers argue that discussing mass extinction now is precipitous and dampens the optimism that we can turn global warming around with a positive "can-do" spirit. Who would have thought that both camps have a psychological mindset in common?  A naive optimism that human beings are just so clever that it will all turn out OK.   Psychoanalysts use the term manic defence to describe how human beings can pathologically cling to optimism and hope as a way of denying their depression and anxiety.   To contemplate mass extinction is indeed a dark place to go to and a difficult conversation to have  even more difficult than global warming itself  because it is to think the unthinkable.  Scientists suspect we are on the cusp of a sixth mass extinction. So how much could human activities be driving the process this time? But spiritual traditions across the world believe it brings depth and richness to our lives to contemplate our own death. It does not necessarily have to be a morbid preoccupation. It is sobering to consider what scientists tell us of the paleo-ontological history of the Earth, which may throw some light on the fate of human beings when we look at the broad sweep of time.  "More than 99 per cent of all organisms that have ever lived on Earth are extinct. As new species evolve to fit ever-changing ecological niches, older species fade away," National Geographic science writer Michael Greshko wrote. "At least a handful of times in the last 500 million years, 75 to more than 90 per cent of all species on Earth have disappeared in a geological blink of an eye in catastrophes we call mass extinctions." As human beings, we need to remind ourselves that we are oxygen-breathing biped mammals. In other words, we are animals. Evolutionary science demonstrates that we are continuous, not discontinuous, with other animal species.  Fossils from around the world suggest the "terrible lizards" were in decline before the collision. If one's view of the world is based on science, we are not special, we were not placed here by a God to be the custodians of the Earth (and if we were, we have let the Almighty down big time!) and like all other species, we will have our place in the sun. We will die out, and other, more adaptable, life forms will take our place.   The myth that we are somehow special and will continue to live forever as a dominant species is based on a deluded human-centric form of existential narcissism.   We may wring our hands and our hearts may ache at the rapid destruction of wildlife that is happening right now before our eyes, but we never seem to seriously consider that we may go the same way.   But as the poet John Donne wrote: "Do not ask for whom the bell tolls, it tolls for thee". We may liken the state of the Earth to a man who has just been told by his doctors that he has lung cancer.  There is treatment available that might save him, but it cannot be guaranteed that it will work.  The human species may, metaphorically, keep puffing away on fossil fuels and an inevitable death may well be the outcome in a blip of geological time.   But even if we "undergo the treatment"  changing over to sustainable forms of renewable energy, for example  there is no guarantee of survival.   Friends of mine who work professionally in palliative care tell me that most people have peaceful deaths. Even better, it is well documented that some people have transformative spiritual experiences as they near the inevitability of death.   They atone for all of their past mistakes quite freely and without restraint, their hearts open to loved ones and enemies alike, and they experience a sense of oneness with the transience of life and the interconnectedness of all things.  We can only aspire to the same maturity of spirit.  As a psychologist, years of clinical experience tells me it is healthier to gently bring anxiety out into the open and discuss it empathically with others rather than taking refuge in angry denial or manic defence.   This includes how we talk to children about this distressing topic when they want to engage us with their questions and their fears. Climate change is scary, and it can be really distressing for children. This is how one mum found a way to talk to her kids honestly, without making them panic. The same guidelines for talking to children generally about death can be applied here.   When I have worked with children who have a parent with a life-threatening illness, I find it is much wiser for the adults to tell the truth calmly and kindly rather than give false hope.   There is a vast difference in saying to a child, "Daddy is very sick but the doctors are going to make him better and he will be home soon," compared to, "Daddy is very sick and everyone is doing everything they can to help him get better but we can't be sure he is going to live much longer. We all hope he pulls through." Children can sniff out the anxious emotion behind the sweet syrupy words of false optimism much more than we give them credit for.  They pick up an incongruence between the positive message and the exaggerated emotion with which it is expressed, and it confuses them.  Being straight with them will calm them far more than false optimism.   This means the adults learning to calm themselves in the face of their own inevitable mortality.   The practice of mindfulness and the contemplation of one's own death is one beneficial way to do this. While mass extinction from global warming, including mass extinction of human beings, is a new and concerning threat that we have not had to face before, death itself is not new. Our here-and-now lives are more vibrant and full of gratitude when we can embrace them fully. Geoff Dawson is a psychologist and Zen Buddhist teacher. 
Here's what you need to know today: Two men allegedly involved with the Bandidos motorcycle gang have been charged in relation to the theft of $5,000 in building materials from a Devonport motel. Tasmania Police said they conducted a search at the Bandidos clubhouse on February 26, following the theft the previous day at the Argosy Motel. "A 32-year-old Bandidos outlaw motorcycle gang member and a 39-year-old Bandidos associate have been charged with stealing," police said, adding as a result of the search, "all of the stolen property has been recovered". Both men have been charged with stealing and have been bailed to appear in the Devonport Magistrates Court on April 20. Anyone with further information is urged to contact Tasmania Police on 131 444, or Crime Stoppers anonymously on 1800 333 000 or online at crimestopperstas.com.au. The Tasmanian Government has reminded the public there has been no positive local results from coronavirus testing and the state "remains well prepared", in the wake of the Federal Government's implementation of its emergency response plan. In a joint statement, Premier Peter Gutwein and Health Minister Sarah Courtney said they had received an "update" that the Government had "moved ahead of the World Health Organisation and is now effectively operating on the basis that a pandemic had been declared".  "The Prime Minister believes the risk of a global pandemic is very much upon us and as a result the Commonwealth Government has taken steps necessary to prepare for such a pandemic," the statement reads. "The plan includes preparations for extra controls at airports and ports, further quarantine measures and detailing how schools should react to any widespread outbreak." The Tasmanian Government said it "recognises travel restrictions may have an impact on some Tasmanian businesses", and encouraged anyone with any questions to call 1800 440 026 or visit the website. Tasmania's entry into the National Basketball League is expected to be made official today. It is understood league owner Larry Kestelman will hold a press conference this afternoon in Hobart to announce that Tasmania will enter the competition. It will come off the back of a Glenorchy City Council vote that will see the Derwent Entertainment Centre sold to the State Government. The Tasmanian team will play home games out of the revamped arena from next year. The state has not been represented in the national competition since 1996. The Tasmanian Greens have referred two ministers and a public servant to the Integrity Commissioner for alleged misconduct relating to a now-defunct forest protest ban, which threatened those staging demonstrations with fines of up to $500,000 before the ban was withdrawn on Tuesday. Greens leader Cassy O'Connor alleged Resources Minister Guy Barnett, Attorney-General Elise Archer and Mark Cocker from WorkSafe misused their positions, abused power and issued an unlawful prohibition against the Bob Brown Foundation seeking to peacefully protest. "We know this was an overtly political act designed to intimidate peaceful protesters who are standing up for our beautiful forests. We hope that the Integrity Commission recognises that this is an issue of ethics in government," she said. Ms Archer described the action taken by the Greens as disgraceful.  Tasmania's fifth wind farm has started power generation, nudging the state towards its target of using 100 per cent renewable energy by 2022. The $280 million Granville Harbour Wind Farm is expected to produce energy for 46,000 homes.  Resources Minister Guy Barnett said that production would help Tasmania become fully reliant on renewable energy in two years time. "We're on track to get to 100 per cent, fully self-sufficient in renewable energy by 2022 and that's very encouraging indeed" he said. But Goanna Energy's Marc White said the State Government still had to do more to meet the target. "The Granville Harbour wind farm will produce around two per cent of the state's consumption". "The Cattle Hill wind farm will produce about 3 to 4 per cent, so that'll still see us with a little bit of a deficit on the average inflow a year," he said. The state forecast for Friday is for showers and cool conditions in the south-west, clearing showers and cool in the south-east, and mostly cloudy and cool-to-mild in the north.  Saturday: Showers, mild in the south-west. Windy on the highlands. Mostly sunny, warm in the south-east. Mostly sunny, mild-to-warm in the north. Sunday: Showers, mild in the south-west. Mostly cloudy, mild in the south-east. Mostly cloudy, cool-to-mild in the north-west. Late shower, mild in the north-east. Monday: Showers, cool in the south-west. Mostly sunny, mild in the south-east. Mostly sunny, cool-to-mild in the north-west. Clearing shower, cool in the north-east.. A full and updated list of warnings can be found on the Bureau of Meteorology's Tasmanian Warnings summary webpage. Updated information about fires and permits can be found on the Tasmanian Fire Service website. Source: Bureau of Meteorology 
"In January, days stretch out, with lots to do and find; we feel the sand, we tie the bait, we swim, we play, we stay up late." So mused acclaimed author Jane Godwin in her celebration of the great Australian summer  a narrative intrinsically linked to our national identity. From family camping trips along the coast, to bouts of backyard cricket, our love of summer cuts across all sects of the country, unifying even the most divided amongst us. But this year, for much of the eastern seaboard, languid days basking in the breeze were replaced by anxiety: for our homes and neighbours, for our families and friends, and for a future marred by climate change and the more extreme conditions it has started to bring. Images of sun-drenched families that would once symbolise the holidays were replaced by apocalyptic scenes of children in masks, enveloped by a red and orange hue. Thousands of homes that should have been adorned with Christmas decorations were instead reduced to rubble, and grieving families were left to grapple with the reality that their loved ones would not see the summer's end. As we mark the close of summer and the horror bushfire season  escalated by the outbreak of coronavirus and flooding along the east coast  any residual glow the festive season may have once had is nowhere to be seen. "So many people have come out of this summer probably in a worse sort of condition  because of the disruption and anxiety that came with the bushfires," says University of Tasmania fire ecologist David Bowman. "I think everyone in Australia probably knows someone who was affected. "It's a big event in your life, but now we're moving back to real life, the kids have to go back to school, people have to go back to jobs, and they're beginning to pause and go 'I never had a holiday'." So, is it time to say goodbye to the typical Australian summer for good? It is a question Professor Bowman has been pondering since the nation found itself in the crosshairs of unprecedented climatic conditions, now known as the "Black Summer". This bushfire season was always predicted to be ferocious, but with months of hot weather to go, it has already left a scar on the nation. As we contemplate a future where these kinds of catastrophes become increasingly frequent, he argued in an op-ed for The Conversation, perhaps it's time we rearranged the calendar and reschedule the peak holiday period to March or April. The proposal struck a chord with readers both at home and abroad, Professor Bowman says  something he puts down to its cross-cutting sentiment. "The Prime Minister got caught out on his holiday  [and then there was] the effect on the firefighters who missed out on their holiday and important family time," he says. "Something comparatively simple like rescheduling holidays, in my view, that's a trivial alteration in the adaptive program we're staring down the barrel at." While the economic impacts of the fires are predicted to run into the billions and the impact on tourism and trade has been highly publicised, there are lingering questions around the more intangible impact the lost summer has had on our national wellbeing. Ross Garnaut's climate change prediction is coming true and it's going to cost Australia billions, economists warn. Tony Veal, an adjunct professor at the University of Technology Sydney, likens it to the Cold War. "At one time, people were worried about whether we were going to be blown up by nuclear war, people can get very stressed about those things, as many people are by climate change," he says. "And if it's on your doorstep with fires and floods, it becomes even more stressful. Obviously, the people directly involved with it are stressed, but it can have an impact on the community at large." Professor Veal, who specialises in the role of leisure in work and planning policy, doesn't mince words: "In a very basic sense, if you don't have any time off, it'll kill you". But with nearly 80 per cent of Australians affected by the summer crisis in some way, the idea of a holiday might seem like a foreign concept for many  from those on the frontline working tirelessly trying to reckon with the ruins and communities living under the shadows of tragedy, to tourists who found themselves stranded in the fire zones and those forced to reschedule their summer break. "Now we have this coronavirus issue, so all those things contribute to stress," he says. "Whether you sit and chat with your friends or family, or play with your kids, or whether you go to the pub and have a drink, you need time to do it. "In times of stress, whatever the source of the stress, one needs that outlet. If you don't have those opportunities to take a break, there are consequences." The link between trauma born out of natural disasters and its impact on productivity and wellbeing has been well documented, both anecdotally and in scientific literature. But with millions of hectares burnt, wildlife decimated and the devastation firmly etched into the national consciousness, psychiatrists fear the secondary effects could be more widespread than many first thought. They are the heart-stopping videos that stopped the nation and stunned the world. But who filmed them and how did their stories end? "You might find that a person will be safe in their house, but they're worried about their friends out in the fire truck," says associate professor John Allan, president of the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists. "The blanket coverage we've had on television  I think people really saw this as a watershed moment for the country. "There's a secondary effect on many, many people through relationships and love  love for their country and love for their community  [and so] a very broad range of people are affected." As the weeks and months pass, and the nation irrevocably turns its attention elsewhere, the residual impact will continue to be felt by those communities on the frontline of the disaster. But while many will recover, for others, the trauma of our lost summer will remain for years to come. "You have the event, and all the support rushes in, there's all this wonderful stuff, and then the support is withdrawn," Professor Allan says. "There are people where that trauma lingers, and that becomes manifest over the next year or two, so starting about now. "This is the time we really need to make sure everyone has recovered, and those that haven't, really need that support." 
Refugees in Turkey have headed towards Europe after an official declared that borders had been thrown open in response to the escalating war in Syria, where 33 Turkish soldiers were killed by Russian-backed Syrian government troops. European officials rushed to respond to Turkey's direct threat to reverse an agreement that halted the migration crisis of 2015-2016, when more than a million people arrived by sea in Greece and crossed the Balkans on foot. Moscow and Ankara traded blame over the strike in northwest Syria, the deadliest attack suffered by the Turkish army in nearly 30 years. Turkish financial markets plunged over the prospect of the country being pulled far more deeply into a new escalation of the nine-year-old war across the border in Syria. "We have decided, effectively immediately, not to stop Syrian refugees from reaching Europe by land or sea," a senior Turkish official said on condition of anonymity. "All refugees, including Syrians, are now welcome to cross into the European Union," the official said, adding that police and border guards had been stood down. Within hours, a column of dozens of migrants was heading on foot towards the European frontier in the early morning light. A man carried a small child in his arms. Others rode in taxis. The Syrian conflict has spawned a whole generation of children impacted by bombing and conflict. "We heard about it on the television," said Afghan migrant Sahin Nebizade, 16, in a group packed into one of three taxis parked on a highway. They had been living in Istanbul and were heading for a border crossing to Greece. At the Greek border, Hamid Muhammed, carrying a young girl, said he had been turned back by Greek police. "We want the Turkish and European governments to open this gate," he said. Greece and Bulgaria said they were immediately reinforcing their frontiers. Bulgaria's Prime Minister said the prospect of a new migration crisis was even more of a threat when European countries were struggling to respond to the coronavirus. However, both the EU and the United Nations refugee agency noted reports of any change at the border were still unofficial and Ankara had not made any formal announcement. Inside Syria itself, the escalated fighting has brought on perhaps the worst humanitarian crisis of the entire nine-year-old war. A million civilians have been displaced since December inside Syria near the Turkish border, in desperate winter conditions. Turkey, already home to 3.7 million Syrian refugees, said it could not take more. The Syrian civil war has worsened dramatically in recent months despite largely vanishing from the agenda of Western countries. Seven years of bloody conflict have backed hundreds of thousands of civilians into this deadly corner of the country with nowhere to run. What happens in Idlib is in the hands of leaders from Russia, Iran, Syria and Turkey. Government forces, backed by Russian air power, have launched an assault to capture the northwest, the last remaining territory held by rebels backed by Turkey. With diplomacy sponsored by Ankara and Moscow in tatters, NATO-member Turkey has come closer than ever in the conflict to direct confrontation with Russia on the battlefield. Presidents Tayyip Erdogan and Vladimir Putin spoke by telephone on Friday morning to head off further confrontation. The Kremlin said they agreed on the need for a new arrangement to avert clashes in Syria's Idlib province. Turkey said the leaders agreed to meet as soon as possible. "There is a risk of sliding into a major open international military confrontation," EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell said on Twitter. "It is also causing unbearable humanitarian suffering and putting civilians in danger." The return of refugees to the frontier was an immediate reminder of the 2015-2016 crisis  Western Europe's biggest migration since World War II  when 4,000 people drowned trying to reach Greece. Since then, Mr Erdogan has repeatedly threatened to "open the gates" in several disputes with European states. "At a time when we are imposing stricter border monitoring over the coronavirus, imagine if we have an inflow of hundreds of thousands of migrants," Bulgaria's Prime Minister Boyko Borissov said, announcing the mobilisation of extra police on the border with Turkey. "We cannot afford that." Turkey, for years the principal ally of rebels fighting against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, has sent thousands of troops and heavy military hardware in recent weeks into Idlib. Mr Erdogan has warned that Turkey would repel Mr Assad's forces unless they pulled back from Turkish posts. The United Nations and others have called for a ceasefire. The air strike on Thursday raised Turkey's military death toll to 54 in February in Idlib. It was the worst losses suffered by the Turkish military since a 1993 attack by Kurdish separatist guerrillas. Turkey's lira slid to a 17-month low and its main stock index plunged 10 per cent early on Friday even though authorities banned short selling across all Turkish shares. The United States, which has troops in another part of Syria, said it was very concerned about the reported attack on Turkish soldiers and stood by "our NATO ally Turkey". ABC/wires 
North Korea fired three short-range projectiles off its east coast on Monday, South Korea's military said, two days after the North threatened to take "momentous" action to protest outside condemnation over its earlier live-fire exercises. Seoul's Joint Chiefs of Staff said the multiple kinds of projectiles fired from the eastern coastal town of Sondok flew as far as 200 kilometres at a maximum altitude of 50 kilometres before landing in the waters between the Korean Peninsula and Japan. A JCS statement said South Korea expressed "strong regret" over the launches that, it said, violate a past inter-Korean agreement aimed at lowering military animosities. South Korea's national security director, Defence Minister and spy chief held an emergency video conference and agreed the North Korean action was not helpful to efforts to establish peace on the Korean Peninsula, according to South Korea's presidential Blue House. Japan's Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga said North Korea fired suspected ballistic missiles. North Korea is testing ballistic missiles again  but where's Donald Trump's "fire and fury"? He said the multiple North Korean projectiles travelled 100 to 200 kilometres but none landed inside Japan's exclusive economic zone. "North Korea's latest action, on top of its repeated firings of ballistic missiles, is a serious threat to the peace and safety of Japan and  a grave problem for the entire international society," Mr Suga said. In the past 10 days, North Korea has said leader Kim Jong-un supervised two rounds of live-fire artillery exercises in its first weapons tests since late November. Mr Kim had entered the new year with a vow to bolster his nuclear deterrent and not to be bound by a major weapons test moratorium amid a deadlock in US-led diplomacy aimed at convincing Mr Kim to abandon his nuclear program in return for economic and political benefits. South Korea and some European countries protested against the second North Korea drills on March 2, which they believe involved ballistic missile launches in a violation of UN Security Council resolutions. North Korea insists it has the right to conduct military drills in the face of US and South Korean forces on its doorstep. The UN Security Council did not issue any statement after discussing North Korea's March 2 drills, but five European members condemned what they called "provocative actions". Belgium, Estonia, France, Germany and the United Kingdom said afterwards that the tests undermine regional and international peace, security and stability. The North's Foreign Ministry on Saturday accused the five European countries of "repeating an absurd argument of condemnation and violation resolutions of the UN whenever we conducted military drills." "The reckless behaviour of these countries, instigated by the US, will become a fuse that will trigger our yet another momentous reaction," a ministry statement said. North Korea has threatened Australia with "disaster"  but could its missiles reach our shores? Last week, Kim Jong-un's younger sister levelled diatribes and crude insults against South Korea for criticising its earlier live-fire exercises, but her statement was followed by Mr Kim sending a letter to South Korean President Moon Jae-in expressing condolences over its coronavirus outbreak. Some experts say North Korea may intend to catch South Korea off-balance before seeking help in reviving its dilapidated economy, since the US has said sanctions on North Korea will stay in place unless it takes significant steps toward denuclearisation. "The coronavirus is likely exceeding North Korea's public health capacity, so Kim Jong-un is playing a two-level game," said Leif-Eric Easley, associate professor at Seoul's Ewha Womans University  "At the domestic level, his regime claims to protect the people with drastic quarantine measures and military exercises against external threats. "Pyongyang may be seeking international assistance, but remains obsessed with not appearing in an inferior position to Seoul." Nuclear talks between Pyongyang and Washington remain stalled since the breakdown of a second summit between Mr Kim and President Donald Trump in Vietnam in early 2019. Subsequent talks between the two countries failed to produce much progress amid disputes over how much sanctions relief should be given in return for a limited step to move away from nuclear weapons by North Korea. AP 
Thousands of people around the world have defied government restrictions and fears of the coronavirus to take to the streets to mark International Women's Day. Large demonstrations demanding increased gender equality and an end to female exploitation took place in cities including Madrid, Buenos Aries, Kiev and Manila. Demonstrations in Paris and Bishkek, the capital of Kyrgyzstan, were marred by clashes between police and demonstrators. In Pakistan, thousands of women held rallies across the country despite the threat of violence from fundamentalist groups. Demonstrators clashed with police in Chile and Turkey, as well as Mexico where thousands gathered to protest the number of women being killed in the country every day. Dozens of women covered Mexico City's central Zocalo square with names of victims like Adriana, Dulce, Paola, Nayeli, Ingrid, Maria and many others as part of protests against gender violence. The march was then led by the mothers of murdered girls. "I don't want to be the next one, and I don't want my mother to be the next one," Ana Paula Santos, a 21-year-old university student, said. Government data shows 3,825 women suffered violent deaths in Mexico last year, 7 per cent more than in 2018. Thousands more have gone missing without a trace in recent years. That works out to an average of more than 10 women killed each day, many of those at the hands of their partners, making it one of the most dangerous countries in the world for females. Murders of women in Mexico are often accompanied by sexual violence and brutality, and authorities seem incapable of preventing or properly investigating the crimes, very few of which result in convictions. Marchers carried signs saying, "we are the heart of those that no longer beat", and, "I'm marching today so that I don't die tomorrow". Bands of masked women smashed windows, lit fires and spray-painted messages on buildings. Many in the crowd cheered at the sight of vandals spraying messages like, "we're fed up". One of the biggest demonstrations was in Chile, where thousands flooded the streets of the capital, Santiago. There was dancing and music as well as angry demands for gender equality and an end to violence against women. "They kill us, they rape us, and nobody does anything," some chanted. National police estimated 125,000 people took part in the capital and nearly 35,000 in other cities, but organisers said the crowds were far larger. Many protesters demanded that a proposed new constitution strengthen rights for women and thousands wore green scarves in a show of support for activists in neighbouring Argentina, which is considering a proposal to legalise elective abortion. In the Philippines, where abortions are punishable by up to six years in prison, President Rodrigo Duterte's record on women's rights became one of the targets of the protests in Manila. "In many different ways or forms, women are being exploited and taken advantage of," Arlene Brosas, the representative of a Filipino advocacy group, said during a rally that drew hundreds to the area near the presidential palace. Tens of thousands of women took to the streets in Madrid and other Spanish cities, with a massive banner reading, "with rights, without barriers. Feminists without frontiers", carried at the front of the march in the capital. Spanish health authorities did not put any restrictions on the march but recommended that anyone with symptoms like those of coronavirus stay home. Authorities said 120,000 people participated in Madrid's march, down from 350,000 last year. In Pakistan, women managed to rally in cities across the country, despite petitions filed in court seeking to stop them. The opposition was stirred in part by controversy over a slogan used in last year's march: "My Body, My Choice." Some conservative groups had threatened to stop this year's marches by force. But Pakistani officials pledged to protect the marchers. The rallies are notable in a conservative country where women often do not feel safe in public places because of open harassment. In Istanbul, Turkey, riot police fired tear gas to try to disperse thousands of demonstrators, while security forces in Kyrgyzstan arrested about 60 people  reported to be mostly women  after a group of men tried to break up what authorities called an unauthorised rally in the capital, Bishkek. Tens of thousands of women also marched through Paris, bemoaning the "virus of the patriarchy". "Enough impunity!" chanted some activists, who focused on the high rate of women killed by their husbands in France, where one woman was killed every two or three days by a current or former partner in 2019. The French Government has increased efforts to crack down on domestic violence. "They should provide resources for shelters for women, victims of violence, real resources, human resources, also prevention programs for violent men," union activist Julia Parbotin said. ABC/wires 
CUCQTTBPCCWWC5WPCCHAACSAECCRCCGCNCPCTSICCCRCVCCT'CCNCYADHSRCDUAKHBQHCWLSRCFGRAGUCPJANECDFESCA'CWIANTTECNCQPWCMMMWCCCRHQECCYTVQWCFWCHCWCBMHCCDLCBHCNMBCCCEAATWGCASCACCEHOCJUNTBCHCNUPATJAVCHQWNFFWACCVATNFACCNCCTWASAAVCCUGDSGTTUCGTSOSHATTVTNICoronavirus vaccine lessons learnt from swine flu, as pharmaceutical giants look for COVID-19 solution
For Russell Basser, the pressure was immense. It was 2009. Swine flu had arrived — the last global pandemic before coronavirus. Though it was far removed from the devastating impact of COVID-19 — there were no lockdowns and life in Australia remained relatively normal — the virus was killing people. Healthy young people. Like today, the race was on to find a vaccine. And Dr Basser — a top executive at research firm CSL's clinical and regulatory arm — was in charge of finding it. "It [swine flu] was actually hitting kids and pregnant women," Dr Basser said. "We were worried this was going to be something akin to the Spanish flu. "We were racing. We put our full body and soul commitment into getting that vaccine developed. "And there was pressure, as there is now."The pressure is real. Across the world, more than 115 coronavirus vaccines are in development. Eight human trials are underway — five in China. It is a global race between nations and the subject of US espionage claims against China. Billions are being poured into development, with big pharmaceutical companies teaming up to speed up the process. But the prize — if it comes — will become a powerful political tool, potentially freeing the citizens of the country that produces it from the shackles of life with coronavirus. And though the stakes may not have been as high in 2009, lessons have been learnt to help with the response today. Two people in PPE protective gear, and a person holding up a passport. This facility in Wuhan, China has started phase two human clinical trials of a coronavirus vaccine(AAP)CSL, today the most valuable company in the country, is Australia's biosecurity partner and manufacturer of the seasonal flu jab. As it is focused on influenza vaccines, it is not actively involved in the search for a coronavirus vaccine, apart from supporting others in their efforts, like the University of Queensland. But back in 2009, it was at the forefront. And it achieved its goal. Dr Basser's Australian-based team was the first to carry out human trials of a swine flu vaccine. CSL then received approval in September 2009 with the Australian government kicking off its immunisation program the same month. A Chinese firm working on similar timeframes kicked off its program days later. "It was a bit of a relief more than anything," Dr Basser told the ABC. "A relief that we could develop a vaccine with the volumes required for the Australian population, much more efficiently and much quicker than we might have been able to. "We were very efficient in what we did."But what happened next is the issue that has some in the global health community worried. By the end of 2009, about 37,000 Australians were diagnosed with swine flu and 190 people died. Yet Australia came out of the swine flu pandemic relatively unscathed because of CSL's swift response. CSL had agreements with a number of countries: Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, the US and Canada to hand over the vaccine, in turn producing a healthy windfall for the company. Yet, the governments of those countries determined how it got used. These countries entered into contracts with big pharmaceutical companies, effectively monopolising the H1N1 swine flu vaccine at the expense of poorer nations, who were pushed to the back of the queue. Looking back, Dr Basser said the mistakes made more a decade ago were informing today's decisions. "As a global ecosystem of vaccine developers, not only do we need to look out for our own communities, but we also do need to look after the rest of the world," he said. "And one of the big learnings from swine flu was that the system and network wasn't as well set up as what it could have been. "The world's had a wake-up call."Evening out the playing fieldTony Cunningham, an adviser to the Federal Government on Australia's coronavirus vaccine response, consulted with CSL and the global vaccine company that distributed it across the world back in 2009. The founding director of the Westmead Institute for Medical Research's virus research centre said the fact that countries would "often look after their own populations first" was relevant to COVID-19 response and that issue remains a "major concern" for the World Health Organization. But since the swine flu experience, there has been a global push to level the playing field. The Switzerland-based Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), founded in 2016 by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, was established to coordinate the development of new vaccines to prevent and contain infectious disease epidemics. It is in the midst of negotiations with a range of companies, research arms and state-backed organisations for a coronavirus vaccine. Last week it granted American vaccine development company Novavax US$384 million ($599 million) for its push to find a coronavirus vaccine — CEPI's biggest-ever funding boost. Will history repeat?There are still concerns if a vaccine is successful, what happened in 2009 could happen again. The concerns are centred on countries such as the US — a leader in pharmaceutical research — being hit so hard by coronavirus that if one is produced in-country it will not be shared worldwide for months or even years. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. The ABC understands CEPI's negotiations with companies in the US and the Trump administration have been sensitive, with work still to be done in locking down agreements. The concerns have also spread to China. Although some commentators suggest China is keen to use the development of a vaccine to reboot its global standing on the back of coronavirus, others fear a state-backed firm may not be as generous with its intellectual property. Professor Cunningham said the speed at which companies and researchers were racing towards a vaccine was exciting — but also concerning. "It generally takes us eight to 18 years to produce a vaccine, the shortest is about four years," he said. "We're seeking to do this, which everyone is saying, within 12 to 18 months. We have got to be careful — we can't short change the checks on safety. "But this is going to require alliances, and I see a lot of collaboration happening around the world; people are energised by the emergency."Collaborations big and swiftPharmaceutical giants Sanofi and GSK joined forces last month to look at developing a vaccine. Pfizer, another global pharmaceutical leader, is collaborating with a German biotech, while Johnson and Johnson, the biggest pharmaceutical company in the world, has committed US$1 billion ($1.6 billion) in collaboration with the US Government to try and find a vaccine. While it is not unusual to see collaborations in the sector, big pharma intellectual property expert and Herbert Smith Freehills partner Rebekah Gay said the speed at which these agreements were moving was "extraordinary". "There's been a willingness on the part of companies to just get in and start working without being caught up in legal intricacies or arguments about intellectual property ownership," she said. "And what that means is we're seeing vaccine candidates in a timeline that we've never seen before."In Australia, CSL is the manufacturing or "industrial" partner of the University of Queensland's vaccine push — which is being part-funded by CEPI — and would produce it locally. But if a locally produced vaccine did not eventuate, CSL would work with the Australian Government in its negotiations with foreign governments, CEPI, other companies and research groups to bring the successful vaccine to Australia. Some experts predict any vaccine would need two doses, meaning manufacturers would have to work together to produce the near 15 billion doses to protect the world. Dr Basser, now senior vice-president of CSL vaccine arm Seqirus, said in the 11 years since swine flu the research community had woken up. And although there were still many uncertainties, he said the response to the COVID-19 threat so far had shown its development over the past decade. "This is not about a commercial return," he said. "This is about overcoming a threat to everybody. And that we could share appropriately if only one or two vaccines were successful. "And given the way the global vaccine ecosystem has behaved up until now, I am cautiously optimistic we'll find a solution."
US doctors say hydroxychloroquine is 'not promising' for treating coronavirus, but Donald Trump is taking it anyway
US President Donald Trump says he has started taking an anti-malaria drug that researchers say should not be used to combat coronavirus and has the potential to cause serious side effects. Studies from the US, France and China have concluded that hydroxychloroquine is not effective for treating COVID-19, and in April the US Food and Drug Administration warned its use could cause heart problems. Despite that, Mr Trump has called the drug a "game changer" in the fight against COVID-19, and now says he has been taking it for more than a week. In Australia, hydroxychloroquine has been spruiked by Clive Palmer, who took out back-to-back full-page newspaper advertisements to claim his foundation had bought 32,900,000 doses of it. Here's what we know about hydroxychloroquineWhat is hydroxychloroquine?An arrangement of hydroxychloroquine tablets. Several studies in different countries have yet to show benefits for coronavirus patients taking hydroxychloroquine.(AP: John Locher)It is usually in tablet form and regulates the activity of the immune system. It has mostly been prescribed to treat malaria, lupus and rheumatoid arthritis. Hydroxychloroquine has also been used for years to dampen the immune system in people with autoimmune conditions. In the US, conditional emergency use for adults hospitalised with a coronavirus infection has been approved by the USFDA, while in Australia a trial is underway using Australian Defence Force personnel. Research into its potential risks is ongoing. Why has it been linked to coronavirus?In clinical trials, hydroxychloroquine has been shown to stop coronavirus from entering cells. But that doesn't mean it would work outside lab conditions as a treatment. "One of the key things is that a lot of these drugs we find are going to be effective against the virus just in cells, [and] probably won't be that effective in the disease setting," Dr Larisa Labzin, an immunologist at the University of Queensland, said. "Really what we're looking for is not just that these drugs inhibit the virus replicating in people, but also that the people who get sick with the virus actually do better."Because hydroxychloroquine is already used in treatments for other conditions it can be fast-tracked in development to go straight to large human trials, unlike other drugs that would need to go through more tests first. In March, there was a surged in demand for hydroxychloroquine, driven by claims about its potential as a coronavirus treatment. That led to pharmacists being told to stop dispensing it so there would be enough supply for those who needed it as part of treatment for rheumatoid arthritis and malaria. Does it work for coronavirus?Several prominent doctors say they are worried that people could decide to take hydroxychloroquine because of Mr Trump's actions. "There is no evidence that hydroxychloroquine is effective for the treatment or the prevention of COVID-19," said Dr Patrice Harris, president of the American Medical Association. "The results to date are not promising."International research efforts have not yet found any benefits of taking the drug for those with coronavirus. A study from France concluded the drug did not significantly reduce admission to intensive care or deaths among patients with severe cases. A randomised clinical trial from China showed no improvement for patients with mild or moderate symptoms who were prescribed hydroxychloroquine. The drug made no difference in rates of clearing the virus and did not reduce the duration of symptoms, but did cause side effects. Two earlier large observational studies, each involving around 1,400 patients in New York, found no benefit from hydroxychloroquine. Going even further, two studies published last week in the leading medical journal BMJ concluded that hydroxychloroquine should not be used in the treatment of coronavirus. What are the possible side effects?The USFDA has released emergency-use guidelines for hydroxychloroquine outlining warnings for its potential side effects. They are:Dangerously rapid heart rateAbnormal heart rhythmsProblems with the heart muscle properly recharging between beatsIssues with the heart's ability to pump blood around the bodySevere hypoglycemiaRupturing of red blood cellsLow counts for platelets and red and white blood cellsLiver failureKidney failureIncreased risk of seizuresPsychosisDeliriumSuicidal behaviourHallucinationsRetina damageWhat is the Australian connection?The Australian Defence Force is testing Chloroquine, from which hydroxychloroquine is derived, on its personnel as a potential preventative measure against COVID-19. The resumption of trials of the drug has horrified an East Timor veteran who has been suffering long-term health issues after taking part in a controversial clinical trial of the drug almost 20 years ago. So far, 42 personnel have enrolled and started the 14-week trial, and Defence is seeking up to 700 civilian and ADF frontline healthcare workers to volunteer. Associate Professor Jane Quinn, a pharmacology researcher at Charles Sturt University's School of Veterinary Sciences, said she did not think there was currently enough international evidence of efficacy to justify the ADF trial. "Chloroquine is a drug that's been used for a very long time in the prevention and treatment for malaria and over time it's become increasingly out of favour particularly for having quite a significant side-effect profile," she said. "That's what makes it a little bit surprising that Chloroquine, particularly, is being suggested for use in this ADF trial."Which other drugs are being looked at?The experimental antiviral drug remdesivir, which belongs to a group used to treat HIV and hepatitis C, has shown some promise in the lab for treating SARS, MERS and coronavirus. Mr Trump has said he wants the USFDA to approve the drug "as quickly as they can". But early studies of its use have been criticised for lacking proper control measures, and two trials in China were suspended. Scientists are now waiting for the results of large randomised controlled trials in the US and Europe. The US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) has been giving the drug to some patients hospitalised with COVID-19 and lung complications. Preliminary results released in late April showed patients recovered 31 per cent faster with remdesivir than with a placebo. However, with conflicting data coming from a range of experiments, experts have urged caution. Remdesivir, which failed as a treatment for Ebola, is designed to disable the mechanism by which certain viruses, including coronavirus, make copies of themselves and potentially overwhelm their hosts' immune system.
Coronavirus combines with end to interest-only home loans in big hit coming for investors, experts warn
House prices are tipped to fall by 11 per cent over the next three years as the COVID-related economic downturn bites, and for one group of Australian homeowners, it could not come at a worse time. Key points:Many small-scale investors use interest-only loans to buy propertyThese loans convert to principal and interest after a set timeThis increases financial pressure for those hit by the COVID downturnThere are an estimated 730,000 investors, many of whom are self-funded retirees or people planning for retirement, who have taken out interest-only bank loans in the belief property was a safe bet. Coronavirus has already delivered challenges, including rent arrears and the prospect of losing their tenants altogether. But now these private landlords are facing big hikes in their monthly bank repayments as they switch from interest-only to paying off the principal of their loans as well. Max Green is one of many who has been trying to negotiate with the banks for an extension to the interest-only period of his loans. The 69-year-old and his partner have bought two properties — one in Brisbane, the other in Perth — in the past 10 years to help fund their retirement. But the value of the Brisbane property has flatlined and the Perth property, a unit in the city's outer suburbs, has plummeted from $425,000 in 2016 to $300,000 today, according to a recent valuation. "The intent was … to provide us with some equity growth in the properties, which would then assist us in the future once I had retired," Mr Green said. "We had been advised that we would be able to extend the interest-only period."Instead, the couple face paying an additional $1,900 a month from July as they begin to pay off both the principal and interest on their loans. Mr Green said he still enjoyed his work as a project manager at WA's Water Corporation, but conceded his retirement ambitions had not gone to plan. He said he would now be forced to either keep working beyond 70, dip into the couple's superannuation to pay the banks, or sell at a loss. Investors brace for massive lossesOthers with similar investment plans have already decided to cut their losses and are now facing negative equity as a result — where their home is worth less than the amount they owe. Wayne Grimes, 50, said he couldn't help but laugh when he considered the price he would likely now get for his luxury investment unit. "I'm laughing because it is just ridiculous," he said. "I bought it for $670,000 … and I'll be lucky if I'm able to sell it for $400,000."The two-bedroom, two-bathroom house in the inner-city area of West Perth has been on the market for five weeks, but Mr Grimes has wanted to sell it since 2017 when his interest-only loan was converted to principal and interest. "Originally when I bought that place I was getting $895 a week in rent and now I get about $415 a week," Mr Grimes said. "That coupled with [paying] principal and interest, there has been a big hit to our cash flow."Like many investors, Mr Grimes put his savings into property to try to get ahead for retirement. "The whole idea behind it was so that we wouldn't have to rely on government pensions and government handouts when we got older, that we would be self-sufficient and create our own wealth," he said. "But it hasn't worked out that way."Mr Grimes said his bank had been very helpful in allowing him to defer his loan payments for six months due to coronavirus, which would buy him time to sell the West Perth property, albeit at a huge a loss. He faced being left with a $180,000 debt. "I'm not here to blame anyone, it's no-one's fault, it's just that this is how the market has gone," he said. Call for interest-only extensions by defaultSenior Liberal MP Dean Smith has raised the prospect of a "tsunami of forced sales" by desperate landlords offloading properties in a falling market. The party's chief whip in the Senate said he had received reports from investors around the country struggling with mortgage repayments. Some had been forced to sell, while others were at risk of losing their own homes. Sharp rise in unemployment could trigger house price crashThe spread of coronavirus across Australia could see unemployment reach about 10 per cent and house prices drop 20 per cent, says one economist. "If property investors are forced to sell into a falling market, then that is a cost that every Australian property owner will have to bear," he said. "That will put downward pressure on an already dampened property market and that will harm the financial wellbeing of every Australian family that owns a property, not just property investors."The West Australian senator argued the banks should by default, honour requests by borrowers to extend their interest-only periods to help them ride out the COVID crisis. "Some of the stories these property investors have told me are heartbreaking and the banks should be ashamed," he said. "What I see is a great opportunity for a non-taxpayer-funded stimulus where the banks could be more responsive to ease some of that financial pressure that people who are on interest-only repayment arrangements are experiencing just before they move to principal and interest."Senator Smith said extending interest-only loan periods had been common practice before regulators imposed responsible lending limits in 2015, but those restrictions had since been eased. He was seeking support from Government, Opposition and crossbench MPs for an inquiry into interest-only loans and the banks' handling of them during the COVID crisis. Banks already helping '700,000' customersThe Australian Banking Association would not comment directly on Senator Smith's call for banks to roll over interest-only terms by default during the COVID pandemic. But chief executive Anna Bligh said in a statement the industry had worked tirelessly since the beginning of the outbreak to help businesses and individuals doing it tough. Ms Bligh said 700,000 customers had already applied for, or been granted, support on loans totalling more than $200 billion. "Investors whose tenants are unable to pay rent as a result of COVID-19 are able to access a six-month deferral to mortgage repayments, including principal and interest, to help them get through to the other side of this crisis," she said. "Interest-only options are still available to customers, with banks needing to assess a request to remain on interest-only repayments on a case-by-case basis, in line with regulators' prudential requirements and guidance."Analyst fears a 'perfect storm' comingThe impact of forced sales by investors facing negative equity would certainly place further downward pressure on the housing market, according to CoreLogic head of research Tim Lawless. "I think it's something that lenders will be very conscious of once we reach the expiry of the leniency policies that are in place at the moment, which will be towards the end of September. That's something we need to watch very carefully," he said. But Mr Lawless said he believed the impact on many borrowers of switching to principal and interest (P&I) would be cushioned by the significant fall in interest rates. "The interest-only loans typically have a mortgage rate of around about 3.5 per cent, whereas a principle and interest loan will typically have a interest rate of 3.2 per cent, so there could be some cost-saving there for those investors who do transition from interest-only to P&I," he said. "By and large the best strategy … would be to try to secure the best P&I mortgage rate possible and pay their debt down rather than just continuing to pay off their interest. "But of course not everybody can do that."Analyst Martin North, from Digital Finance Analytics, said 8 per cent of property investors were looking to offload their properties in the coming months. Mr North said the COVID-19 crisis had created another pressure point for investors already struggling with the migration of their loans to principal and interest, plus other factors. "We've got a perfect storm emerging, particularly for property investors," he said. "We've had a very significant increase in the number of units on the market and some of those would have previously been used by international students, but of course they didn't come back [for the new term]. "Some of those would have been used by Airbnb, but they haven't come back."But Mr North said he did not support Senator Smith's call on banks to extend the interest-only terms for property investors. "Strategically, it does not make a lot of sense to me," he said. "We've got to deal with the amount of debt in the system. "We have too many property owners with too much debt, they're too leveraged."
Qantas enforces new coronavirus precautions on flights, but no social distancing
Qantas has unveiled new measures to prevent the spread of COVID-19 on its flights — but social distancing is not one of them. "Social distancing on an aircraft isn't practical the way it is on the ground," Qantas medical director Dr Ian Hosegood said. "Given the low transmission risk on board, we don't believe it's necessary in order to be safe."It comes a week after Qantas chief executive Alan Joyce told the ABC that his company was seeking an exemption from social-distancing rules with the Federal Government. The airline will roll out its "Fly Well" safety measures from June 12. Pre-flight safetyPassengers will notice some major differences before they board a Qantas or Jetstar plane:Contactless check-in (via the airline's website or app) and self-serve bag drop are "strongly encouraged"There will be hand sanitising stations at the departure gates, and more regular cleaning"Increased physical distancing" at Qantas Lounges (but not on the flight itself)On-board precautionsQantas has also outlined its safety measures, in lieu of social distancing:It will provide masks to all passengers — wearing one is "not mandatory", but is recommended for "everyone's peace-of-mind""Enhanced cleaning" with a focus on seats, seatbelts, overhead lockers, air vents and toiletsOnce passengers are seated, they will be asked to "limit movement" around the cabin. They will also receive sanitising wipes to wipe down seat belts, trays and armrests themselvesThe airline will "encourage" passengers to download the Government's COVIDSafe app and "require" them to follow strict hygiene protocols'Extremely low' riskIn a statement, the airline said its air conditioning would get rid of almost all viruses on board. "The air-conditioning systems of all Qantas and Jetstar aircraft are already fitted with hospital-grade HEPA filters, which remove 99.9 per cent of all particles including viruses."It also said the cabin air was refreshed, on average, every five minutes during the flight. Dr Hosegood said there were a number of reasons why the risk of being infected with coronavirus onboard was "extremely low". "That's due to a combination of factors, including the cabin air filtration system, the fact people don't sit face-to-face and the high backs of aircraft seats acting as a physical barrier."Five-minute window of infectionThe Transport Workers Union said Qantas' new measures were not enough, accusing the airline of "downplaying" the risks. "At least 60 workers across the Qantas Group have been infected with the virus," the TWU said in a statement. "A dossier compiled by TWU safety experts revealed systematic failing in how Qantas dealt with an Adelaide Airport cluster, which saw 34 workers infected and over 750 quarantined.""It's hard for an airline to be profitable if social distancing were enforced," said Professor Raina MacIntyre, a virologist at the University of New South Wales. "But being in an aircraft is a high risk … it's an enclosed space where lots of people congregate for long periods of time. "Also, if a passenger has COVID-19, they may show no symptoms."When asked about Qantas' air-conditioning system, Professor MacIntyre said the use of HEPA filters would help to limit the risk of catching coronavirus. She said the risk of infection also depended on whether Qantas was using "outside" air or "recycled" air — the riskier of the two options. Even refreshing the cabin air every five minutes might not be enough. "Studies of tuberculosis show that if you're sitting a few rows behind or in front of someone, you're at risk," she said. "In the five minutes between air changes, you're still at risk. "I have made a personal decision not to fly unless I'm vaccinated from COVID-19."Across the world, many governments and pharmaceutical companies are spending billions of dollars in a race to develop a coronavirus vaccine, which could be months or years away. Earlier this week, the World Health Organization (WHO) has even warned that COVID-19 may "never go away" and we might have to learn to live with it.
This is where Australians can travel during coronavirus lockdown
Over the past several weeks, Australia has successfully flattened the curve, making it one of just a handful of countries ready to start easing restrictions designed to stop the spread of coronavirus. But with NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian and Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk in a war of words over when state borders should reopen, it is clear not every leader is ready for life to return to some semblance of normal. All over the country, there have been strict quarantines enforced with few, if any, exemptions. Here's a rundown of what to expect in each state and territory. Where can Australians travel right now?Not overseas, that's for sure. The Federal Government made a decision to ban Australians from travelling overseas on March 26 and there are no plans to lift that rule until at least the end of the year. As for entering the country, only Australian citizens, permanent residents and their immediate family members can travel to Australia — but you had better be prepared to stay in mandatory quarantine for 14 days after arriving. Travellers who have a compassionate or compelling reason to travel to Australia will need to have an exemption from the Australian Border Force Commissioner before travelling. On the domestic front, there are only limited flights operating at the moment — sometimes just one per day between capital cities — and they are expensive!NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian and Tourism Minister Stuart Ayres have called for all states and territories to reopen borders by July 1, but Australians will most likely have to wait until July for more frequent flight routes to start up between states — perhaps even later for Queensland. What are the rules for travelling to each state?They are many and varied and strictly enforced. Here they are below. QueenslandPremier Annastacia Palaszczuk has said she won't be considering opening up the state's borders until at least September. So that means nobody is allowed into the Sunshine State unless they have a border pass. Queenslanders can travel freely to NSW and Victoria and don't need to quarantine but should reconsider their reasons for doing so. They can also travel to the Northern Territory and South Australia but will need to show why that travel is essential. If they can't, they'll go into a 14-day quarantine. Moving house or starting a new job, or attending to other essential tasks such as getting to a medical appointment or caring for a family member, all fall into the essential category. Residents who live on the borders of Queensland, NSW, South Australia and the Northern Territory are able to cross into different states more easily for work, school or medical services if that was usually a part of their routine. New South WalesRethink travelling to Queensland or South Australia if you live in NSW. Unless there's a good reason, you'll be denied entry. But travel to Victoria and the ACT isn't a problem. There is no need to quarantine or self-isolate back in NSW if you have travelled interstate. However, if you have symptoms, even mild symptoms like a cough, get tested. A person in Sydney can travel to visit someone in regional NSW and while they can stay overnight, they shouldn't be going anywhere for a holiday. Northern TerritoryQueensland, South Australia and Western Australia have just as strict border controls as the Northern Territory, so those in the Top End are best to just sit tight and enjoy their relative freedom compared to the rest of the country. Of course, if they really want to, they can go to NSW, the ACT and Victoria. Non-essential travellers to the state are required to go through a police control checkpoint to verify their medical status and purpose of travel. Those not eligible for an exemption must complete 14 days of forced quarantine. South AustraliaIt's perfectly fine for South Aussies to travel to NSW and Victoria with no need to quarantine. Those thinking of heading to Queensland, Tasmania or the Northern Territory without cause will be turned back. Everyone entering South Australia will be required to isolate for 14 days as well. Exemptions will apply for essential transport, workers providing essential goods and services, medical needs, freight and supply chain operations, residents of border communities, carers, and for police, emergency services and ambulance workers. TasmaniaTravel from the Apple Isle to Victoria and NSW is ok. Anywhere else, not so. Tasmanian residents will be able to complete quarantine at their home but non-residents will have to complete quarantine at government-provided accommodation. Essential travellers may be exempted from quarantine. VictoriaThe only other jurisdictions to share Victoria's relaxed border restrictions are NSW and the ACT, so Garden State residents can travel to both those places easily. Tasmania, South Australia, Queensland, Western Australia and Northern Territory won't let you in without a good excuse. Travelling to a holiday house within Victoria is still permitted if you own it, or often stay there. There are no requirements in Victoria to quarantine after travelling domestically. Australian Capital TerritoryThere are no border restrictions here and residents can flit between their state and NSW and Victoria with ease. Every other state will require a two-week period of quarantine when you enter. Canberrans should only travel outside of the Canberra region to visit family and friends for the purpose of providing care and support and they will need to abide by rules in the jurisdiction they are travelling to. Western AustraliaIf you live in the West, you can't get into neighbouring states Northern Territory and South Australia easily. But NSW, Victoria and ACT are fine — if you can find a flight to get you there. There is also a temporary closure of the Western Australian border in place which is being strictly policed. Travellers cannot enter Western Australia unless an exemption has been granted. I need to see my family – are there any exemptions?Yes, most states will allow entry or travel on compassionate grounds. Just make sure if you need to apply for an exemption ahead of time — such as in Queensland, Western Australia, Tasmania or South Australia — you do so before attempting to enter. Exemptions will be permitted for people who must cross a border for critical goods and services; a person who wishes to attend the funeral of an immediate family member, or; a person who wishes to visit a terminally ill or dying immediate family member. Participating in child custody arrangements, Family Court or parole and bail conditions are also valid reasons to travel. People who live near the borders of Queensland, NSW, South Australia or the Northern Territory can continue to travel for work or education into different states. These residents can also travel interstate to obtain essential goods and services, including to attend school or childcare, or obtain medical supplies or services or other essential services. But don't stay in your non-home state for longer than necessary.
This family skips meals to pay rent during the coronavirus pandemic — they say rent aid goes a long way
Jacky Pham and his wife both work as nail technicians. When social distancing measures to curb the COVID-19 pandemic were put in place two months ago, their jobs became redundant. But even though the couple had both lost their jobs, they still had to meet their $700 fortnightly rent payments for their home in Hobart's Sandy Bay suburb. "I'm in a difficult situation because of coronavirus. I don't have enough money to pay rent," Mr Pham said. "Sometimes we just skip one meal per day. "On a normal day, we eat two meals a day," Mr Pham said, adding some days they were down to one. Mr Pham said he contacted the Harcourts rental agency about having lost his income on March 26. He said he was given a form for rent deduction, which he filled out promptly, but had to keep following up. Mr Pham said the agency said the landlord had been "ignoring them" and the agency was not in a position to reduce rent without the landlord's permission. Two months after first flagging his predicament, Mr Pham is still paying the full price in rent. He has even resorted to asking his family in Vietnam for help, and was a day late in his last payment — for the first time ever. "I told the agency that I don't have enough money and that's why I have to lend money from my friend and my family. That's why I was late one day," he said. Harcourts property manager confirmed Mr Pham had flagged the change to his financial situation and inquired about rent relief. The manager said the landlord had not responded to requests to have his tenants' rent reviewed, and the agency could not make decisions on the landlord's behalf. However, the agent said Mr Pham was told he could pay as much rent as he could afford. Rent relief for those who've fallen through the cracksMr Pham is a foreign national and does not hold a permanent residency. This means he has not qualified for the Federal Government's JobKeeper or JobSeeker support during the pandemic. But from next week, he can apply for the Tasmanian Government's COVID-19 rent relief fund. The Government on Tuesday announced Tasmanians and visa holders who pay at least one-third of their income on rent, have less than $5,000 in savings and can prove they experience "extreme hardship" can access rent aid. The targeted support of a one-off $2,000 payment or four weeks' of rent covered also extends to tenants who are not covered by the Residential Tenancy Act. Attorney-General Elise Archer said many people had not been able to access JobKeeper and JobSeeker, and the new relief package benefits those who have previously fallen through the cracks. "We believe there remains some who are suffering extreme hardship and who require further assistance with rental payments," she said. "Payments will be made to landlords and it will be a requirement they pass on this level of assistance to renters to meet their rental obligations."Ms Archer estimated there were around 1,000 tenants in Tasmania who required this help. "We've uncapped the fund, so there isn't a limit. However, we believe that there could be up to $1.5 million dollars required," she said. The Tenants' Union of Tasmania solicitor Ben Bartl said there were around 26,000 temporary residents like Mr Pham in Tasmania, who did not get Federal Government support during the global pandemic. "We are getting calls every day from tenants who are unable to pay the rent. In some cases landlords are asking that they sell their possessions in order to pay the rent," he said. "These are desperate people in desperate circumstances and the Government should, where possible, provide assistance to them."He said the Tasmanian Government should be "congratulated" on putting in place the rent relief package, but the help could have come sooner. "In hindsight, yes, the Government should have moved sooner. But that said, the Government is one of the first in Australia to introduce this measure, and for that they are to be congratulated," he said. "We know that this initiative is in place until the 30th of June, which is when the emergency period is meant to end. "If COVID-19 does continue and tenants can demonstrate that they are in financial hardship, we would hope that the Government would step up and continue to provide additional funds."Mr Pham said his employer had already indicated he might not have a job to return to after restrictions are lifted. He said any help from the Government would go a long way. "I'm sure that I will apply for [rent relief]. With that financial support I can keep paying rent until I can get a new job," he said.
Brewers fear for their livelihoods as they pour millions of litres of beer down the drain amid coronavirus pandemic
Global beer consumption is expected to be a massive 800 million cases down on last year, forcing breweries across the world to pour millions of litres of beer down the drain due to coronavirus restrictions. Key points:France has to destroy 10 million litres of beer due to the pandemic, as beer needs to be consumed freshMore than half of Australia's independent brewers could go underMost of Germany's 9,700 beer-related festivals have been cancelledThe closure of pubs, bars and restaurants and the cancellation of major beer-drinking festivals, such as Munich's Oktoberfest, have left many breweries fighting for their survival. A traditional and family-owned brewery in southern Germany that has been operating for more than 400 years is just one of many businesses brought to its knees, closing its doors forever. Rabobank grains and oilseeds senior analyst Cheryl Kalisch Gordon said the world's beer drinkers were expected to consume 82 million hectolitres less than last year. "That's a lot of beer globally … and we don't expect less drinking of beer on-premises would be made up by additional at-home consumption," she said. "The challenge will be greatest for those companies or beer producers that rely on that on-premises consumption, and typically … that would be craft beer producers."Australia's craft brewers under threatThe Independent Brewers Association (IBA) recent survey of more than 650 craft breweries in Australia found more than half may not survive without government assistance. IBA board member Johnny Latta said some brewers lost 70 per cent of their revenue overnight while others based in regional towns had lost all their revenue. "There will be a lot of breweries that will not reopen," Mr Latta said. "Unfortunately, there will be a lot of beer that just goes to waste because it is ageing and fresh beer is what everyone wants."Tom Freeman, who owns Wilkadene Woolshed Brewery in South Australia's Riverland, said they had to find creative new avenues to stay afloat. "We rely a lot on tourism, that really was a big stress and the financial impact we will feel for many years, I suppose," Mr Freeman said. He believed they were lucky to be able to package beer onsite and offer free deliveries to customers in metropolitan and regional areas, but the brewery lost about 75 per cent of its income in April alone. France destroys 10 million litres of beerIn France, a country with more than 2,000 breweries, the Brewery Union said 10 million litres of beer — equivalent to four Olympic-sized swimming pools — would have to be destroyed after the cancellation of all major events before September due to the pandemic. "Brewers think it will be too late in June or July to consume their beers brewed last winter … they prefer to collect and destroy the products for a best guarantee of quality," brewery union Brasseurs de France said in a statement. Europe's largest beer-producing nation, Germany, saw most of its 9,700 annual beer-related festivals cancelled, leaving many breweries on the verge of ruin. The world's biggest beer festival — Oktoberfest, celebrated in Munich since 1810 — saw visitors drink 7.8 million litres of beer in 2019, but not this year. Press spokesman for the German Brewers' Association Marc-Oliver Huhnholz said the pandemic had a dramatic impact on the country's 1,500 breweries. "The situation worsens every day … the total damage for breweries is still not yet foreseeable," Mr Huhnholz said. "We still see a fatal domino effect: the conflagration in gastronomy is spreading to the brewing industry. "We share the assessment of the German HOTREC [hospitality association]: without additional government aid, irreparable economic damage is at risk … many breweries will not survive this existential crisis without emergency aid."Centuries-old brewery to shut downAmid the first losses due to the coronavirus crisis is one of Germany's oldest breweries. Operating since 1617, the family-owned Wernecker Bierbrauerei in Bavaria, which survived a revolution, crisis and two world wars, had to give up the fight. The brewery's closure in September will not only have an enormous impact on the family and its 26 employees but will also take away part of local history and tradition in the small town of Werneck in the brewery-rich state of Bavaria. Family member and brewery manager Christine Lang said the decision to stop brewing was heartbreaking. "The brewery is not just a job for us. It's our passion, it's part of our identity that falls away and it is very painful to see that," Ms Lang said. The family business lost most of its revenue overnight when coronavirus restrictions were put in place. Ms Lang said they decided to continue running the business until September in the hope of selling all of its beer. "We don't know yet if we have to destroy some of our beer. It hurts our hearts but we hope it can find its way to the beer lovers," she said.
Private health insurance dumped by thousands after coronavirus restrictions force service cancellations
Hordes of young Australians are abandoning their private health insurance policies after the coronavirus pandemic left health funds charging people for services many could no longer use. Key points:Data shows about 11,000 people aged between 25 and 29 abandoned private health insuranceDrop coincides with the introduction of Government restrictions on services because of COVID-19Consumer advocates say nothing has been done to address people's concerns with sectorIn the first glimpse of the impact of the crisis on the private health insurance industry, the latest data shows almost 11,200 people aged between 25 and 29 dumped their private health insurance in the three months to March 31. While there were increases in cover among some Australians, such as people aged between 70 to 79, overall the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) statistics showed about 9,800 Australians dropped their private health cover over the three month-period, as restrictions set in and the economic consequences of the pandemic began to hit. The trend of young people fleeing the sector has been a continuing concern for those within the industry and the Government, who fear the healthcare system could find itself in a "death spiral" if young and healthy people continue to abandon cover. The fall in policies coincided with the introduction of the Government's coronavirus restrictions, and the subsequent economic consequences of the pandemic. Consumer group CHOICE said the full impact of the crisis on the rate of private health insurance coverage would be seen in next quarter's statistics, with the latest data only taking into account the beginning of the pandemic. But CHOICE health campaigner Dean Price said even before COVID-19, the statistics were dire. "It's no wonder — nothing has been done to address people's concerns that private health insurance costs too much, is too confusing and offers too little value," he said. The coronavirus pandemic saw the Government put a stop to all "non-urgent" elective surgeries to conserve valuable resources like personal protective equipment (PPE) and help the health system prepare for an anticipated influx of patients. Some routine services like dental and eye care were also cancelled, as clinics prioritised urgent cases or shut down all together. It meant health funds were charging people for services many were no longer using. The APRA statistics showed, as a result, there was an almost 8 per cent decrease in hospital treatment benefits compared to the last quarter, while total benefits for medical specialties were also down about 8 per cent. To keep the COVID-19 outbreak under control we need to keep growth factor below 1.0Private Health Care Australia chief executive officer Rachel David said if the drop in benefits paid meant health funds were sitting on additional profits, they would look to pass that onto members. "Health funds gave a commitment that any additional funds resulting from COVID-19 related restrictions causing cancellation of some elective surgery and some allied health services would be returned to members," Dr David said. She said now the Government had given the green light for elective surgeries to resume, the industry was bracing for a surge in claims. "Health funds must remain well capitalised and prudentially sound throughout and beyond the COVID-19 crisis to fund the backlog of elective surgeries and allied health benefits," Dr David said. Health funds have acted to soften the financial blow of COVID-19, delaying a scheduled premium increase and reducing or cancelling waiting periods for people to make claims. But CHOICE reignited calls for a review into the system, accusing the industry of dragging its feet in passing on profits to consumers. "Policies that were poor value before COVID-19 have only become worse value as the industry dithers on returning their unexpected windfalls back to their customers," Mr Price said. "The Australian Government must review the whole system by undertaking a thorough public inquiry."
Chinese embassy ridicules Australia for claiming vindication for global coronavirus inquiry
China's embassy in Canberra says it is a joke for Australia to claim it has been vindicated by international support for a coronavirus inquiry. Key points:The World Health Assembly agreed to an inquiry in Geneva on Tuesday nightThe idea of an independent probe was pushed by Australia, but some aspects have been watered downThe Chinese embassy said the inquiry would be "totally different" to what Australia wantedAustralia was the second country, after the United States, to call for an independent inquiry into the global pandemic, a move which sparked a diplomatic row with China. But last night, at a meeting of the World Health Assembly (WHA) in Geneva, China indicated it would likely back a European Union motion that called for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive" evaluation of the response to the global outbreak. More than 100 countries, including Australia, had already co-signed the motion for the probe into the global outbreak. The motion then passed at the WHA gathering on Tuesday night. Some Coalition MPs and senators have been cheered by the broad international support for the inquiry, with former Cabinet minister Matt Canavan saying Australia had been "massively vindicated" by the "outpouring of support from other countries in the world". But Beijing's embassy in Canberra issued a statement saying the inquiry being considered by the WHA was "totally different" to the one Australia proposed and to claim vindication was "nothing but a joke". "A close look at the draft itself can easily come to such a conclusion," the embassy said in a statement. "All those who know the consultation process that led to the resolution understand this. "To claim the WHA's resolution a vindication of Australia's call is nothing but a joke."The skirmish came after China imposed an 80 per cent tariff on Australian barley overnight, all but killing a lucrative market for exporters. China's ambassador to Australia had previously warned there could be trade ramifications if the Federal Government pursued its bid for an investigation into the origins of coronavirus. Australia's initial inquiry bid watered downAustralia initially demanded that the inquiry be led by an organisation outside the World Health Organization (WHO), with Foreign Marise Payne saying it "strikes me as a bit poacher and gamekeeper". Australia has backed away — at least for now — from its call to hand WHO officials the same powers as weapons inspectors. But the Government argues that Australian officials worked hard to toughen up the language in the draft motion so it specifically says the inquiry must be impartial and independent. The Government also points out that the draft motion states the WHO should investigate the source of the virus, as well as how the virus jumped from animals to humans. Trade Minister Simon Birmingham called the embassy's comment "provocative" but said Australia would not engage in "cheap politicking" over COVID-19. "I would have thought the appropriate response from China's ambassador would be to welcome these outcomes and welcome the opportunity for us to work together on this important issue," he told Sky News. Senator Canavan said the stoush demonstrated why Australia would "need to move away from relying so much on China". "The conduct of the Chinese Government over this period, but also the last few years, has been hard to predict," he said. "It's an increased risk for Australian business. We have to work very hard to establish relationships with other countries."
COVID-19 is like three different diseases, says New York doctor, from flu-like illness to severe reactions and rare children's syndrome
Almost 10 weeks into the pandemic, COVID-19 is continuing to surprise and baffle health experts. In fact, experts' picture of exactly how COVID-19 might play out in the body is now quite different to what was thought as little as a few weeks ago, with some experts saying it could be better described as three different diseases. We have known for a while that the mild to moderate form of the disease — a flu-like illness with fever, muscle aches and respiratory symptoms, or often no symptoms at all — is almost like "child's play" compared to the major damage to organs like the the lungs, heart, brain, and kidneys seen when COVID-19 becomes severe. Umesh Gidwani, head of cardiac intensive care at New York's Mount Sinai Hospital, says that trying to treat the severe form of the disease is like facing a terrifying fire, burning out of control. "The patients we take care of [in intensive care] are those in whom the fire has already destroyed the house. But there continues to be embers and small fires. I can't enter the house because it's too hot and things are falling on me," he says. "[Severe disease] is almost a completely different animal [compared] to someone who is recovering at home with some chicken soup and paracetamol". And now it seems there is evidence of a third variation in illness that can occur following exposure to the virus — a mysterious new disease given the name paediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome, with an entirely different set of symptoms again. The syndrome seems to only affect children, unlike both mild and severe COVID-19, which mostly affect adults. However the link between the inflammatory syndrome and the virus that causes COVID-19 is not yet 100 per cent confirmed. The bottom line, says Dr Gidwani, is what we have been calling a single disease — COVID-19 — is really looking more like three separate diseases. He and others draw this conclusion based on how the virus affects the immune system. "The key disaster is the extent and severity of the immune response," he says. It is now clear the symptoms experienced by people with severe COVID-19 are largely caused by the body's disordered immune response to the virus rather than the virus itself, Dr Gidwani says. In fact, the disordered immune response in severe COVID-19 is the disease; they are one and the same thing. In contrast, with mild to moderate COVID, the immune response is more measured, with symptoms largely confined to the upper respiratory tract. But with severe COVID-19, the body's response to the infection goes into overdrive. In particular, substances called cytokines, which tell other parts of the immune system there is a problem that needs fixing in the body, and which coordinate the immune response, are released in excessive amounts. This creates what's known as a "cytokine storm", which ends up causing damage to healthy tissue. Doctors have seen similar cytokine storms in people with different kinds of infections or with certain cancers. But the cytokine storm with COVID-19 is wildly different. As a result, therapies that work for the other cytokine storms don't control the problem, Dr Gidwani says. "My brain is thinking 'what is going on? Is there a way to fix this?' I don't know what to do," he says. "It is very challenging, very frustrating, very upsetting."'This is a brand new disease'Understanding what makes the cytokine storm unique in severe COVID-19 is important as it means there may need to be a different approaching to helping patients get better. "This is a brand new disease. We are seeing more and more that the therapies we are used to working with don't necessarily produce the same results with COVID," Dr Gidwani says. One important difference is that the cytokine storm in severe COVID-19 results in widespread blood clotting, which can in turn trigger heart attacks, strokes, deep vein thrombosis (DVT), pulmonary embolisms (clots in veins in the lungs) and limbs so damaged they may need to be amputated. This can lead doctors to misjudge how sick a patient is and withdraw supportive measures such as a ventilator before they should. "It is important to realise this is a distinct [immune] syndrome and that you can therefore avoid certain pitfalls," says Dr Gidwani. "This is not what we expected at the outset. "But we never knew what to expect. I don't know what will happen next either."Over-activation of the immune system could be a major "unifying element" that explains a large part of why the disease can play out in such different ways in severe COVID-19 and in PMIS, says Australian cardiologist and blood vessel researcher Jason Kovacic. An immune attack on blood vessels potentially explains many of the key dangerous features of both conditions, says Dr Kovacic, who is Professor of Medicine and Cardiology both at New York's Icahn School of Medicine and the Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute at the University of NSW.
With more than 1.5 million confirmed cases and 90,000 Americans dead, US President Donald Trump is determined Americans will have coronavirus treatments manufactured there, handing out a billion dollar contract.
This story will be regularly updated throughout Wednesday. Wednesday's key moments:US seeks to end dependence on other countries for pharmaceutical drugsThe UK to face a 'severe recession' as official death tolls tops 35,000Formula One says quarantine exemptions must be provided for elite sportsSweden tops Europe COVID-19 deaths per capitaMike Pompeo called Taiwan a reliable partner prior of President Tsai Ing-Wen's swearing-inUS seeks to end dependence on other countries for pharmaceuticalsUnited States President Donald Trump's administration awarded a contract worth up to $US812 million ($1.2 billion) for a new US company to manufacture drugs and drug ingredients to fight COVID-19 on American soil, aiming to end dependence on other countries. The announcement comes as the US records more than 90,000 deaths and 1.5 million confirmed cases of the coronavirus, according to figures by Johns Hopkins University. The administration has been looking to build up the ability to produce drugs and their raw materials in the US after the global pandemic exposed the industry's dependence on China and India for its supply chain. The US Department of Health and Human Services said that it had awarded a 4-year, $US354 million contract to privately-held Phlow Corp to make COVID-19 drugs, other essential drugs and their ingredients. The contract can be extended for up to $US812 million over 10 years. Phlow said all pharmaceutical products will be made in the US and the contract will help it contribute to a national stockpile of active pharmaceutical ingredients for essential medicines. UK deaths top 35,000 but thousands more feared dead from COVID-19The death toll from coronavirus has topped 35,000 in Britain according to official government figures, but that figure could be closer to 45,000 according to the UK's Office for National Statistics (ONS). The rise was an increase of 545 on the figure provided on Monday. The official government figures, which come from the Department of Health and Social Care, differ from the ONS numbers as the include only people who died who had previously tested positive for COVID-19, whereas the ONS numbers include all suspected coronavirus deaths. Tuesday's numbers from the ONS paint a grim picture in care homes, more than a third of which have been stricken by COVID-19. Deaths in care homes across the United Kingdom topped 10,000 as of May 8, although the increase has slowed over the last couple of weeks. "Deaths in all settings including care homes are falling … but we need to do all we can to continue to protect the most vulnerable in our care homes," a spokesman for Prime Minster Boris Johnson said. Meanwhile the UK's treasurer warned parliament there would not be an immediate bounce-back for the nation's struggling economy as Britain recorded its highest number of people claiming unemployment benefits since 1996. "It is not obvious that there will be an immediate bounce-back," Chancellor of the Exchequer Rishi Sunak told the House of Commons, saying the retail sector, for example, would still face restrictions when it reopens. "We are likely to face a severe recession the likes of which we have never seen," he said. "In all cases, it will take a little bit of time for things to get back to normal, even once we have reopened currently closed sectors."The UK has been in lockdown since March 23 but some workers were asked to return to work last week. British F1 GP under threatFormula One said the UK Government's quarantine plans would rule out a British Grand Prix and affect tens of thousands of F1-related jobs if exemptions are not granted for sport. Ministers said they plan a 14-day quarantine for most people arriving in the country in the coming weeks to try to prevent a second peak in the COVID-19 pandemic. Formula One is planning two Grands Prix without spectators at Silverstone, which this year marks the 70th anniversary of hosting the first world championship race, immediately after two in Austria in early July. Seven of the 10 Formula One teams are based in England and plans for the season, which has yet to start due to the pandemic, would be disrupted by teams being forced into two weeks' quarantine every time they return from abroad. "A 14-day quarantine would make it impossible to have a British Grand Prix this year," a Formula One spokesperson said. "It has a major impact on literally tens of thousands of jobs linked to F1 and the supply chains. If all elite sport is to return to TV, then exemptions must be provided."WHO chief says he will keep leading virus response after US threatThe World Health Organization's head said he would keep leading the global fight against the coronavirus pandemic, after US President Donald Trump threatened to cut off funding and quit the body. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus defended the agency's role after the US again withheld full support for a resolution on the pandemic. "We want accountability more than anyone," Dr Tedros told a virtual meeting of the WHO'S 194 member states. "We will continue providing strategic leadership to coordinate the global response."The WHO declined to comment on Mr Trump's threat to quit the international organisation, saying only that it had received his letter and was considering its contents. Washington allowed the resolution calling for a review into the global response to the pandemic to pass by consensus, but said it objected to language about reproductive health rights and permission for poor countries to waive patent rules. The US mission in Geneva said in a statement that paragraphs on the right of poor countries to waive patents to obtain medicine during a health emergency would "send the wrong message to innovators" trying to produce new drugs and vaccines. They added that the WHO's reproductive healthcare language could be interpreted as requiring countries to permit abortion. "The United States believes in legal protections for the unborn," it said. Sweden tops Europe COVID-19 deaths per capitaSweden, which has opted for a more open strategy in combating the virus than other European countries, has the highest number of deaths in Europe per capita from the COVID-19 disease over the last seven days, data showed. Sweden has kept most schools, restaurant and businesses open during the pandemic. While deaths are on the decline, Sweden had 6.25 deaths per million inhabitants per day in a rolling seven-day average between May 12 and May 19, according to Ourworldinsata.org. That was the highest in Europe and just above the United Kingdom, which had 5.75 deaths per million. Over the course of the pandemic Sweden still has fewer deaths per capita than the United Kingdom, Spain, Italy, Belgium and France, which have all opted for lockdowns, but much higher than Nordic neighbours Denmark, Norway and Finland. Sweden's strategy, mostly based on voluntary measures regarding social distancing and basic hygiene, has been criticised by some as a dangerous experiment with peoples lives, but also been put forward as a future model by the WHO. Sweden's open strategy seems to have softened the blow on the economy, with growth shrinking much less than in Denmark and Norway in the first quarter. Wuhan tests more than 400,000 people for COVID-19 in one dayThe city of Wuhan, the original epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak in China, conducted 467,847 nucleic acid tests on one day in May 18, a local health authority said. The staggering number is up from the 335,887 tests a day earlier. Wuhan kicked off a campaign to test all of its 11 million residents last week to look for asymptomatic carriers — infected people who show no outward sign of illness. On May 9-10, the city confirmed its first cluster of COVID-19 infections since it reopened from a 76-day lockdown in April. Mike Pompeo praises Taiwan's coronavirus responseUnited States Secretary of State Mike Pompeo congratulated Taiwan's President Tsai Ing-Wen on her re-election, praised the country's coronavirus response and called it a reliable partner. "We have a shared vision for the region — one that includes rule of law, transparency, prosperity, and security for all," Mr Pompeo said in a statement. His statement sharply contrasted recent US criticisms of China, which claims Taiwan as a province. Since the coronavirus was discovered in China's Wuhan province less than six months ago, tensions have mounted between the United States and its trade-war foe China. "The recent COVID-19 pandemic provided an opportunity for the international community to see why Taiwan's pandemic-response model is worthy of emulation," Mr Pompeo said. China views Ms Tsai, who will be sworn into office for her second and final term on Wednesday (local time), as a separatist bent on formal independence for Taiwan. At her inauguration, Ms Tsai is expected to say that Taiwan will seek to "actively participate" in international bodies and deepen its cooperation with like-minded countries, generally a reference to the United States and its allies. Spaniards to change habits post lockdownSpain lifted a ban on direct flights and ships from Italy but maintained a block on cruise ships, as a survey showed the coronavirus outbreak had put locals off travelling. A reduced death rate from COVID-19 has encouraged Spain, with the world's fourth-highest number of infections, to begin easing one of Europe's strictest lockdowns. But the tourism-dependent economy is likely to have to wait until late June to welcome holidaymakers back. Madrid surprised its European partners by introducing a two-week quarantine last week. In Barcelona, people living within a kilometre of a beach will be allowed to sunbathe on the sand from Wednesday (local time). The pandemic has become Spaniards' biggest worry, and most of them plan to change habits when they are free to move, according to a poll by the Government's Centre for Sociological Studies. Just 14 per cent of those surveyed said they planned to travel abroad when the lockdown is lifted. Big purchases are on hold — only 4.2 per cent were thinking about buying a new car and 3.4 per cent a house. Bars and restaurants will have to coax back the 30 per cent of people who said they preferred not to eat outside their homes.
World Health Assembly formally adopts independent review into handling of coronavirus pandemic
The World Health Assembly has formally adopted a resolution calling for an independent review into the handling of the coronavirus pandemic. Key points:Australia was vocal in calling for the independent review, straining relations with BeijingDespite initial doubt, China added its name to the resolution before it passedThe review will investigate the global response to the pandemicDelegates applauded when the draft resolution passed without objection at a meeting in Geneva. Australia was among the nations to call for an independent probe, which put a strain on relations with Beijing. Foreign Minister Marise Payne said Australia welcomed the news. "The resolution commits to an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation into COVID-19, at the earliest appropriate moment, to review the lessons learned from the international health response coordinated by the World Health Organization (WHO)," she said. "Australia will continue to be a consistent and constructive voice in the international community to advance and protect our national interest and the global interest."Health Minister Greg Hunt, who addressed the assembly on Monday, said he was "delighted" with the passing of the motion. Delighted that the WHA Assembly has passed by consensus the Motion calling for an impartial, independent & comprehensive examination of the global response to COVID-19. China ultimately agreed to co-sponsor the resolution, adding its name to the document shortly before it was adopted. Chinese President Xi Jinping had earlier declared his country would support a review led by the World Health Organization, but only once the virus was brought under control. That led to some Australian Government MPs and senators claiming vindication for Australia's position. But Beijing's embassy in Canberra issued a statement saying the inquiry being considered by the WHA was "totally different" to the one Australia proposed, saying that to claim vindication was "nothing but a joke". "A close look at the draft itself can easily come to such a conclusion," the embassy said in a statement. During a media conference on Tuesday evening, China's foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said Australia's advocacy for the probe was improper. "China has stated its stand multiple times about Australia's independent probe on the epidemic," he said. "We firmly oppose political manoeuvring on the epidemic. "In fact, this kind of action isn't proper, won't win people's hearts and won't succeed."
Coronavirus misinformation and confusion plagues health workers
Dr Charlotte Hespe was upset when she saw acquaintances circulating emails that promoted bogus coronavirus prevention measures. To make it worse, the information claimed to be from an infectious disease expert when it wasn't. In her Sydney general practice, visitors have requested prescriptions for hydroxychloroquine — the anti-malarial drug promoted by US President Donald Trump as a treatment for coronavirus, despite a lack of evidence for it working. Key points:Patients are coming to doctors with misunderstandings and asking for unproven treatmentsIn a health crisis this can be a particular challenge for doctors, some of whom are themselves being put at riskSome experts say the problem is fed by uncertainty about the disease as well as sensational media and online networksHealthcare workers across the country are dealing with a global contagion of online misinformation and confusion about COVID-19, as well as the pandemic itself. Some experts say this is fed by uncertainty about the disease and people's understandable need for concrete information that will keep friends and family safe. But at their worst, such misunderstandings or falsehoods can put health workers and institutions dangerously in the spotlight. For example, in early April, the NSW Nurses and Midwives' Association reported workers were being told by hospital administrators not to wear their uniforms to work after incidents of abuse by people who believed they were spreading the virus. There have been reports of Victorian staff being racially profiled. Hospitals have also been targeted. In the United States, and to a much lesser extent in Australia, people who claim the crisis is exaggerated or invented have encouraged their followers to film health facilities. Dr Vyom Sharma, a general practitioner in Melbourne, said he's most concerned about people who may still doubt the importance of hygiene and social distancing. "The grand irony is that because we've done so well [in Australia] that people don't see how horrific the consequences are," he said. "I don't see us winning this war on misinformation right now. Despite all the things Australia has done well, the one place we have always been behind [in] is the information battle."The risks of unproven treatments and early researchWhile Facebook, Twitter and YouTube now promote links to the World Health Organization and local health bodies, these messages compete in the newsfeed against misinformation or sensational news reports that are often more emotional and engaging, and thus more shareable. For Dr Hespe, medical research from early studies that have not been peer reviewed has been the greatest challenge. She's fielded questions about the impact of pain killers and anti-inflammatory drugs on COVID-19, off the back of early studies regarding ibuprofen and other drugs that have been widely distributed. The patients who asked her for hydroxychloroquine, meanwhile, had been advised by relatives. "They had younger family members who'd heard about it, done some basic research and decided that dad should have it, and so sent dad to have the conversation with the GP," she said. A French study that explored the use of the anti-malarial drug, which was tweeted by President Trump, has had almost 54,000 Facebook interactions according data from the monitoring platform Crowdtangle — an extraordinary number for a relatively dry medical journal paper that has since come under scrutiny by the journal's publishers. Dr Hespe said the media must understand the potential impact when discussing possible COVID-19 treatments that are still unproven. "Not over-promising and under-delivering, even though it's exciting in a news sense," she said. How to talk about conspiracy theoriesDr Chris Moy, the Australian Medical Association's South Australian president, suspects people who have embraced more extreme ideas about COVID-19 — that it was caused by 5G or even Bill Gates — may be unlikely to seek medical care. As a GP in Adelaide, he said he sees patients who don't necessarily believe such theories themselves, but have close relatives who do and are struggling with how to address this lack of shared reality. Of course, scientists are still learning about the disease and how best to treat it — a difficult reality when people want clear, actionable information now to protect themselves and their families. "It is the right mix for a lot of misinformation to happen, but the flip side is, the main messages did get through in the end," he said. Patient autonomy is a "bedrock" of contemporary medicine, said Connal Lee, a health ethicist at the University of South Australia. He suggested medical professionals should understand a patient's experience and start a conversation if they seem doubtful about the doctor's recommendation. "We have seen how a harmful side of misinformation can and does emerge — recently in Melbourne and in the US there have been protests and gatherings that flout the rules and put others in danger," Dr Lee said. "The problem with certain conspiracy groups is that no matter how we respond, it simply feeds into the theory, so we need to be mindful that intervention will not always be successful."A danger to the patient, and the communityDr Sharma in Melbourne is concerned about the risk patients may pose to others if they consume and act on misinformation — as well as the health workers that will treat them if they become ill. He has dealt with the perception among some patients that COVID-19 is a mild illness, for example, just like a cold or flu. "This has the sum total effect of … people just not getting tested," he said. "It informs people's decisions to not socially distance or [to] be much more lax with it."He encourages patients to "fact check" with official sources when they see questionable health information circulating on platforms like WeChat. Dr Sharma agrees with Dr Lee that it's important to make time for a conversation with patients about any contentious views, but the need to do this is even more urgent with COVID-19. Time matters. It's not just the patient's wellbeing at stake if they believe COVID-19 isn't that dangerous or that staying home isn't important, it's about the community's health. "There's a huge asymmetry here," Dr Sharma said. "The risk that an individual poses to the community as a link in the chain of transmission is actually much greater than the risk to themselves."
5G, bioweapons and distrust: Coronavirus conspiracy theories are putting strain on families
You might try to ignore it at first: Your aunt's YouTube videos about how coronavirus is a bioweapon. The former workmate forwarding 5G conspiracy theories on WhatsApp. The pandemic has quickly changed everything — we're confined to our homes, glued to our screens — and among some families and friends, the virus has also fractured a shared sense of what is fact, what is true. Sarah's* father sends her links to websites full of jumbled ideas and misrepresented data. He doubts how dangerous the disease is, and because he's in his 70s, she fears for his safety. "It floored me initially," she says. "He was telling us he was off to do the shopping...still wanting to visit [his family], still wanting us to visit him."She won't let the rabbit holes he goes down derail their relationship, but she longs, during this often dismal and anxious moment, to be on the same page. Imagine vaccines, for example, not just in terms of how they affect our individual body, but also in how they affect "the collective body of a community", as Eula Biss wrote in her book, On Immunity. This means we can be quick to anger when faced with misinformation about infectious disease, suggests Julie Leask, a professor at the University of Sydney's Faculty of Medicine and Health, who has researched anti-vaccination views and how to respond to them. "The way someone thinks and acts on an infectious disease doesn't just affect them, it affects the health of other people," Dr Leask says. Cutting tiesIt can be easy to dismiss coronavirus conspiracy theorists, with their janky YouTube videos and Facebook tirades, but if we want to talk to family and friends who have been persuaded, we must first understand their appeal. Dr Leask describes it as "causal hunger" — the desire to know, where did this illness come from and how can I fight it?"People develop folk tales around disease causation, to make sense of it and find a path for prevention," she says. Sharing conspiracy theories can also be a way for someone to signal who they are — that they are suspicious of authority, or conservative or progressive — suggests Nick Enfield, who heads the Sydney Initiative for Truth at Sydney University. "If there is already some kind of disagreement or rift or difference of ideology or identity … often that's exactly how that comes to the surface," Professor Enfield says. And while these theories may be ignored at Christmas dinner, during a pandemic, some families feel pushed to take a stand. Fiona, 41, and her partner have found themselves avoiding her mother-in-law and her partner over their beliefs about the virus, which she feels have grown more extreme. While she knew her mother-in-law was anti-vaccination, they never really talked about it and maintained a good relationship. The coronavirus outbreak has taken the brakes off. Many of her mother-in-law's beliefs seem to have emerged from YouTube, where hawkers of conspiracy theories that claim social distancing and 5G are means of totalitarian government control have found an audience. "When they're listening to these people on YouTube, it does feel like they belong to a movement or almost like religion," Fiona says. The decision to pause her daughter's visits with her mother-in-law was profoundly difficult, but she and her partner were worried their five-year-old might become frightened by what her grandmother shared about vaccines or the virus. "My daughter misses seeing her nanna," she says. "Because it's toxic, the whole conversation. In order to remove that toxicity, it means that you miss out on the good stuff."Triaging for othersTatiana Ikasovic, 28, an Australian actor in Los Angeles, tries to triage the explosion of coronavirus misinformation she's seen from family and friends on Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp. She makes decisions each day about how to react. If it's an older person, she might be more sympathetic — perhaps they're not familiar with YouTube and aren't sure how to distinguish trustworthy sources from untrustworthy. Often she reminds herself that she doesn't know why people hold particular viewpoints — whether there is a personal reason they're distrustful of authorities. But it bothers her most when young people who haven't been affected by the virus, who are "just on the internet all day", share posts claiming the virus isn't real or that it's the government's attempt to implement a fascist system. "I find that incredibly disrespectful to people who have known people who have died from this illness, and to healthcare workers," Tatiana says. Have you seen something about coronavirus that doesn't seem right?False stamp over social media appsIf something pops up in your feeds or inboxes, please help us by uploading screenshots, photos, videos or links, and tell us how it got to you. She suggests trying to find common ground where possible even if they are "a dead-set true believer". "It's different if they're acting in a way that's harmful to you, or your family or other people," she says. But we shouldn't only be concerned about the people who believe in conspiracy theories, but those who might be exposed to them. If you have an audience among your family on a Zoom call or in Facebook comments, for example, Dr Leask says it can be important to debunk information "quickly, calmly and respectfully". She advises checking where someone first heard the conspiracy theory, about 5G causing the virus, for example, and gauging their strength of belief. If they seem to be simply testing out a theory, you could respond with personalised language along the lines of: "from what I can see, it looks like COVID-19 was caused by a virus passed from humans and that it passes from person to person."Her research on anti-vaccination beliefs suggests it is best to "be brief, be factual, be evidence informed, don't shoot from the hip". Hydroxychloroquine, ibuprofen and blood typeWhat's the verdict on these health myths?Australians are being asked to be on a "team", to stay at home for the public good, but this assumes we share a set of beliefs about the danger of the disease and trust in authorities. Coronavirus is remarkably new and our understanding of it evolves every day, making it even harder for some people to establish a common set of facts with friends and family. Fiona just wants a way to help her relatives out of the YouTube vortex. When they send her videos about vaccination and the pandemic, it seems to come from a place of genuine concern and fear for her health, and the health of her daughter. "I feel like I'm helpless in even helping them, because I think it's so sad they're so distressed by it all," she says. "I'd love to come to them with some stuff, and say 'hey, stop stressing yourselves out, these are the actual facts'."While social media allows what were once fringe ideas to become easily accessible, Dr Enright says we should also remember that broadly they remain marginal overall. "The responsibility is partly on all of us to try and help develop that culture of understanding... and to understand science better than we do," he says. "To have respect for it, and be happy to change our position."
What the WHA is and why it could be very important for an inquiry into the coronavirus pandemic
As the coronavirus pandemic continues a dominate global politics, another health entity has entered the discussion. While the World Health Organization (WHO) has been the focus of the fight against COVID-19, Federal Health Minister Greg Hunt has highlighted the World Health Assembly (WHA) as a focus in the near future. The WHA does not get a lot of publicity, but it could become significant in global politics in the coming days. What is the WHA?The WHA is an annual meeting of all 194 members of the WHO. The assembly is held every May, with delegates from each nation travelling to the Swiss city of Geneva to meet and make decisions on global health, according to the WHO website. This year's event will be the 73rd edition of the assembly, but due to coronavirus, it will be held online. It will be held on May 18-19 — so tonight and Tuesday night, Australian time. According to the WHO website, COVID-19 will take up the majority of the discussion. There are several objectives at each assembly. Making decisions about global health issues is the main objective. These decisions are important because they will direct the policies of the WHO for the next 12 months. Decisions are ordinarily dictated by the WHA executive board, a group of 34 health professionals appointed to the role. Dr Lisa Studdert is Australia's representative on the executive board. Members also elect a president and five vice-presidents of the WHA for the next year. Why is the WHA in the news?Australia, along with other countries including the United States, has called for an independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus pandemic. The WHA meeting will consider a motion, drafted by the European Union, calling for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of the "international health response to COVID-19". Mr Hunt is expecting around 120 other nations to back that call. Calls for an inquiry have angered China, which has started a trade dispute with Australia. Chinese media is reporting that President Xi Jinping will deliver a speech at the WHA opening ceremony, at the invitation of WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. The United States has not said if it will back the motion. The ABC understands that United States diplomats are pressing for tougher language that calls for a probe into how the virus started in China. But Australian diplomats do not expect the US to vote against the motion as it stands. US President Donald Trump has repeatedly accused China of covering up the outbreak and allow coronavirus to spread around the world. Has there been any other news about the WHA?The island of roughly 23 million will again not have a seat at the table when the assembly starts. As it is considered part of China, Taiwan is represented by delegates from Beijing. But Taiwan wants a seat at the table and has attended as an observer in the past. Taiwan's Foreign Ministry earlier this month complained that official coronavirus data and prevention methods it had provided to the WHO were not being shared with the international body's member states. World leaders including Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and Canada's Justin Trudeau have called for WHO to grant Taiwan full membership. The US State Department has campaigned for the WHO to allow Taiwan a place at the table. Australia, too, backs Taiwan joining the organisation, but only as an observer. Today Reuters reported that Taiwan was shelving its push for observer status in order to allow the WHA to focus on the coronavirus issue. "Despite all our efforts and an unprecedented level of international support, Taiwan has not received an invitation to take part," Foreign Minister Joseph Wu told reporters. "The Ministry of Foreign Affairs expresses deep regret and strong dissatisfaction that the World Health Organization Secretariat has yielded to pressure from the Chinese government and continues to disregard the right to health of the 23 million people of Taiwan."
Positive coronavirus tests in aged care residents close two more nursing homes in Melbourne
Two more cases of coronavirus are being investigated at Victorian nursing homes in addition to the case reported at the Villa Maria aged care facility in Bundoora on Monday. Key points:Two residents at aged care facilities in Caulfield and Camberwell have tested positive to coronavirusVilla Maria aged care went into lockdown on Monday after a resident there became a suspected coronavirus caseMiCare's aged care facility at Kilsyth has also entered lockdown as it awaits test results for two residents with flu-like symptomsDeputy Chief Health Officer Annaliese van Diemen said seven new cases of the virus had been recorded in the state since Monday, including two in separate aged care homes. Dr van Diemen said one of the aged care cases was a resident at Lynden Aged Care in Camberwell in Melbourne's east. "The resident is being treated in isolation in a metropolitan hospital," Dr van Diemen said. "Residents and families have been informed by the facility."She said cleaning and contact tracing was already underway. The second case at an aged care facility was a resident at HammondCare's dementia care facility in Caulfield, she said. "A subsequent test has come back negative for that case but we treat all positive cases as positive cases and we don't take any chances," she said. Both aged care facilities will remain closed to visitors for 14 days as a precaution. "At this point in time we don't have a source for the infections at the current facilities so that's why the extensive investigations will continue in the coming days," Dr van Diemen said. Meanwhile, aged care facilities at Kilsyth in Melbourne's east have entered lockdown while they await coronavirus test results for two residents suffering flu-like symptoms. In a statement, MiCare said one resident of its Margriet Manor facility and another at its neighbouring facility Overbeek Lodge were being given special care in isolation while they awaited test results. MiCare said it had tested about a dozen residents for COVID-19 since the pandemic began and all results to date had been negative. The total number of coronavirus cases in Victoria now stands at 1,573, a net increase of six after a previous case was removed due to "reclassification". A statement from the Chief Health Officer said one new case was linked the Cedar Meats outbreak, bringing the total for that cluster to 100, including 64 staff and 36 close contacts. One new case was a returned traveller in hotel quarantine, while three more were under investigation. There were no further cases linked to the McDonald's Fawkner outbreak, with the total number of cases in that cluster remaining at 12. HammondCare senior nurse Angela Raguz said in a statement earlier that further testing was underway and the facility had been placed into lockdown. "HammondCare is treating the result as if it is positive and taking all precautions," Ms Raguz said. She said the resident who tested positive for coronavirus lived in the same cottage as 11 other residents. HammondCare had deployed its outbreak management plan which included additional staff resources and was working closely with the Victorian Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), she said. "Our plan is that there will be information available to families at any time, day or night," Ms Raguz said. "As residents of this home may live with dementia we are especially mindful of their specific needs in what is a challenging time for all residents and staff."Villa Maria aged care in Bundoora went into lockdown after a resident there became a suspected coronavirus case over the weekend. Health authorities initially said the resident was one of Monday's new coronavirus cases but later said the resident had returned an "inconclusive" result that was being treated as positive as a precaution. The home's operator, Villa Maria Catholic Homes (VMCH), said on Monday the entire home was in lockdown as a result and the resident, who had no symptoms, was quarantined in their room. McDonald's distribution centre cleaned following delivery driver's positive testA McDonald's distribution centre in Melbourne has also been closed as a precaution after a delivery driver tested positive for coronavirus. A dozen McDonald's restaurants across Melbourne's north and west closed on Monday due to the positive case, with hundreds of staff asked to self-isolate. A McDonald's Australia spokesman said the company closed the distribution centre last night to conduct a deep clean. He said it was a precautionary measure only and the distribution centre was scheduled to re-open on Tuesday. State Government support for university sector announcedEarlier, the State Government announced a support package for Victoria's university sector, which is struggling to stay afloat during the coronavirus pandemic. Minister for Higher Education Gayle Tierney said the State Government had created the Victorian Higher Education State Investment Fund to supply $350 million for capital works, research, and industry partnerships for universities. Works will focus on new technology and infrastructure that enables universities to conduct new research, commercialise intellectual property and create high-value jobs. The Government is also offering universities payroll tax deferrals valued at about $110 million, providing immediate relief for universities dealing with a shortfall in funds from the downturn of international student enrolments and other revenue loss as a result of coronavirus. Victorian Government announces $350 million for universities to keep staff employed and find new financial opportunitiesMs Tierney said the fund would "help reduce the number of job losses" in the sector due to COVID-19, but was "not the solution". She said the Federal Government was responsible for funding universities but was "clearly" not doing enough to help the sector. "We would like to see them step up and produce more, because here even in Victoria, we have something like 38,000 people employed in the university sector, we want them to be able to keep their job we want to be able to provide a thriving sector," she said. Treasurer Tim Pallas said the Government had spoken to vice-chancellors about the "profound" challenges they were facing. "It's critically important that we understand universities educate future leaders of society and they also help us conduct critical research and ensure we expand our knowledge base and make our lives that much better," Mr Pallas said. But he also said the Federal Government needed to "do more" to help higher education. "The JobKeeper fund does appear to be substantially overfunded for the demand it is currently getting," he said. "The Commonwealth could do more in this space and it's vitally important we all do as much as we can. "We do need the Commonwealth to do more for this sector, it is hurting and it hurting quite profoundly and will have a dramatic impact upon the long term economic vitality of the state and the nation, on the competitiveness of the nation."The Federal Government has so far committed to allowing universities to keep $18 billion in funding budgeted for domestic students, regardless of any drop in enrolments. It has also offered $100 million in regulatory relief for education providers, but denied the sector's requests for easier access to the JobKeeper scheme and support payments to international students.
Coronavirus puppy scams rise sharply as empty-handed Australians lose $300,000
If a cute puppy offered online sounds too good to be true, it probably is. Key points:Australians have lost almost $300,000 to puppy scams during the pandemicThe ACCC says online fraudsters offer dogs that don't exist for saleCavoodles and French Bulldogs were the most common breeds in the scamsThat is the message from the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC), which estimates that Australians have lost almost $300,000 to puppy scams during the coronavirus pandemic. Compared to the previous year, Scamwatch recorded a fivefold increase in April for dishonest schemes to extort money out of consumers for dogs that did not exist. "Loneliness was the most widely reported source of personal stress in Australia during April, and in April was when we saw this huge spike in puppy scams," said ACCC Deputy Chair Delia Rickard. How to suss out a puppy scamDo a reverse-image Google search to check if the photo has been posted elsewhere on the internet. Some scammers get around this by altering the imageDo an online search of the seller's email address, which may bring up warnings on other sitesCheck for membership numbers from breeder associationsCheck out the seller's previous web presenceTry to meet the breeder in person and meet the adult dogs"Unfortunately, the rush to get a new pet and the unusual circumstances of COVID-19 makes it harder to work out what's real or a scam."Ms Rickard said Cavoodles and French Bulldogs were the most common breeds reported in the scams. She urged Australians to reverse image search pictures of the puppies and to put the exact words of the advertisement into a search engine before purchasing any dog online to ensure authenticity. Consumers can also check for membership numbers from breeder associations and look back at the seller's previous web presence. Ms Rickard said that while lonely Australians had long been vulnerable to rackets that preyed on their love of animals, their judgement had been further impaired by the enforced isolation of a pandemic. Victorians were the most likely to fall for puppy scams, spending around $115,000, followed by NSW residents who lost almost $98,000. South Australians were the least likely to succumb to the deception of online tricksters. But it is not just Australians who are succumbing to floppy ears and doe eyes, with the UK, US, Canada and South Africa also reporting a spike in canine fraud cases. Space to play or pause, M to mute, left and right arrows to seek, up and down arrows for volume. WATCHDuration: 9 seconds9sPuppy video used in online scam in Melbourne"It's quite an international scam that has been going for a long time," Ms Rickard said. "I guess there's something that just tugs on everyone's heartstrings when they see cute, adorable puppies."But it is more than just potential pet purchases that have seen Australians fleeced since the coronavirus outbreak prompted strict quarantine measures enforced two months ago. How fast is coronavirus growing around the world?Charted growth in key countries, on a logarithmic scale. This chart uses a logarithmic scale to highlight coronavirus growth rates. Read our explainer to understand what that means — and how COVID-19 cases are spreading around the world. As of April, Scamwatch had received more than 2,500 reports of fraud incidents relating to COVID-19, with consumers losing nearly $750,000. Australians have so far lost more than $53 million to all reported scams this year. Delia Rickard of the ACCCACCC's Delia Rickard says consumers' best judgement is sometimes forgotten in the rush for companionship during COVID-19.(Supplied: ACCC)"It's only a small percentage of the scammers that are actually reported to us, so you could multiply that many times to get the true figure," Ms Rickard said. Ms Rickard advised consumers to be sceptical and cynical to avoid being scammed, especially when it came to the online purchase of a furry isolation companion. "Ask yourself: if something's too good to be true, that might be an indication that it's a scam," she said.
Coronavirus patients with even mild cases of COVID-19 are taking months to recover and suffering extreme fatigue
As a professor of infectious diseases at Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Paul Garner is well qualified to talk about disease. Key points:Many patients who contract COVID-19 are experiencing effects for many weeksSome are complaining of severe fatigueSt Vincent's Hospital in Sydney is undertaking a 12-month study into the effects of the virusHe also has COVID-19. "It's the worst illness I've ever had," he told 7.30. "I've had dengue. I've had malaria. I've never been as ill as this and it's been really frightening because it's so unpredictable."He is on day 59 since being diagnosed. "The disease comes at you when you least expect it," he said. "You feel quite well and then suddenly in the afternoon it slaps you round the head like a cricket bat. "The length of the illness completely floored me. "You just pray every day that it will go away."Professor Garner is still dealing with exhaustion. "It gives you some of the symptoms that are very similar to chronic fatigue but I am hesitant about calling it that," he said. "If we call it COVID fatigue we know where we are. "I have sympathy for people with chronic fatigue syndrome now, and I believe this disease fast-tracks you into experiencing these symptoms."Professor Garner is just one of thousands discovering how tiring COVID-19 can be. Scientists are still uncovering the deadly secrets of the virus and the long-term impact for those who recover from the disease is yet to be fully understood. In serious cases there are concerns about major organ damage. The World Health Organisation states those with less severe cases of COVID-19 should recover within two weeks, and serious cases could take up to six weeks. But even patients with what are considered mild bouts of the virus, are experiencing fatigue and breathlessness well beyond the suggested recovery period. At Sydney's St Vincent's Hospital, it is hoped a year-long study that is getting underway will provide some answers. A key investigator on the St Vincent's Hospital study is infectious diseases physician, Professor Greg Dore. "What we're interested in is looking at any effects of COVID-19," he told 7.30. "It has a broad spectrum of acute illness from relatively mild upper respiratory type infection symptoms to very severe pneumonia and other organ effects. "We're interested in even the milder cases, whether there is an ongoing effect on people's health, what we call a post viral fatigue; effects on people's exercise tolerance, on neuro-cognitive function, so ability to concentrate. "We know that you can get post viral fatigue with other viruses and glandular fever is probably the classic one, but Ross River fever and other viral illnesses are well known to cause viral fatigue."'How long will it take to recover?'One of the patients taking part in the study is Alex Lewis, who 7.30 met in mid March, shortly after she tested positive for COVID-19. Two months later, she is still struggling. "I was quite fit before but now I don't feel the same way," she told 7.30. "My breathing has continued to get worse and exercise is quite difficult. "And it takes me, I reckon, double the amount of time to recover. "My fatigue, it comes and goes a bit."She is keen to know how long it will take to shake the infection. "We still don't have any definitive answer … I'm quite interested to find out from the study if there is anything more we can know about that," Ms Lewis said. 'A very long recovery'US writer Fiona Lowenstein was diagnosed with COVID-19 in mid-March and is bewildered and anxious about how long her symptoms have lasted. "It's been a very long recovery process and very different from what I expected," she told 7.30. She couldn't find any information about what to expect, so she started a support group, which now has thousands of members around the world. Many have had the same experience as her, feeling weary and unwell long after they thought they'd be better. "I thought I had fully recovered a couple of weeks ago, then I relapsed into some old symptoms, chills and sweats. And this intense feeling of fatigue," she said. "It almost feels like I've been hit by a truck at 4:00pm each day. "It became clear to me that there needed to be a base or community for people suffering from this virus where we could talk through everything. "My inbox was flooded."Ms Lowenstein has now been contacted by thousands of COVID-19 patients from around the world, experiencing similar symptoms to her.
How Relationships Australia's Elisabeth Shaw handles tension at home during the coronavirus pandemic
Like a lot of people, Elisabeth Shaw, Chief Executive of Relationships Australia New South Wales, is still trying to figure out how to work effectively while stuck at home. Even for someone who works in the field of relationship counselling, it's no easy task. "This is the problem with being home with the whole family is that I'm trying to find a place where they're not," she says. The last few months have been just as tough for many other people. "Those nearest and dearest to us need to survive this with us," Ms Shaw says. "We don't want people's negative situations to escalate at these times... And so we have to be very careful with each other getting through this. "We want to all be left standing and still be in connection when we get to go back to our normal lives."As a clinical and counselling psychologist who works to enhance relationships within families and their communities, Ms Shaw believes quality relationships are going to be more important now than ever. And she has some suggestions on how we can all continue living and working at home when things get tense. Talking with each otherWith people suddenly forced to spend days or weeks cooped up at home together, it can seem like a challenge to even go the distance without an argument. Listen to the Pineapple ProjectJoin Jan Fran as she explores how to find community and connection amidst coronavirus. A starting point is to work with your strengths, and to acknowledge that coronavirus has disrupted how the household normally works. "If you and your housemates or your partner or your kids don't really talk on an emotional level, absolutely declare it upfront," she says. "If you say, 'Look, I know this feels a bit clunky, but I really want to talk about how I'm feeling.' Then usually everyone relaxes. They could laugh with you, and it's a warm way to be able to talk about some new things in new ways."To get the ball rolling, Ms Shaw says it can help to identify and talk about your own flaws first. "Own your own stuff. Be accountable for what's happening to you. Don't get fixated on why other people are annoying," she says. "Start to look at why you're annoyed and how you might be able to defuse that bomb without waiting for others to change first. "And when you speak about it, say 'Look, I've been irritable this week and I don't think I've handled myself that well at times and I've been reflecting on that.'"That can be a good way to lead by example. If you own your stuff other people might say 'Well look, now you mentioned it I didn't handle it well either.'"In her own life, Ms Shaw finds the end of the day can be the best time to talk, usually on the nightly dog walk. But it's best to pick a time that's not too late, or when everyone is not tired. "I have to find the sweet spot between family members being a bit chilled, and not yet tipped over into exhaustion," she says. "As a mum, I know from a lot of experience that I have a lot of influence (more than I'd like) on the family's mood and resilience. "Many women I speak to agree that they play this role. It can be quite stressful, as it's not always easy to keep it together. "However when I am acting out, and I see the effect on others, I realise I need to pull my head in first, and even agree out loud that I probably started the waterfall of trouble."But it is also worth remembering we can't assume that we'll just remain emotionally even throughout this crisis, Ms Shaw says. "We've got to be tolerant of our own mood changes. It may be from moment to moment, day to day, week to week," she says. "But equally, we have to be aware that everyone we live with is also having those mood changes."A household planAs a way to spark a productive group conversation, Ms Shaw recommends that people develop a household continuity plan to help discuss any problems. "Be proactive," she says. "Call a family meeting or a household meeting and say 'Look let's just draw a line in the sand and review how we've been trapped and what's worked, what's gone a bit pear-shaped.'"The meeting, Ms Shaw says, is an opportunity to name the problems and brainstorm some options. And it should be something that happens once a week or so, to refine the approach. "If you're not proactive now about some of the repeating themes that are already happening, they're only going to keep repeating until they're addressed. At the end of the day, Ms Shaw says it's about being able to work through problems and talk them out. "But the message in all of this is that silence rarely works."
Amalgamation talk begins again as coronavirus hits Tasmanian council coffers hard
When coronavirus hit Tasmania's communities, councils across the state rushed to help by freezing rates and cutting fees but, with coffers bare and staff stood down, it is becoming clear many councils will be the ones in need of aid. Key points:Tasmania's councils have frozen rates and created hardship packages, but it's meant a huge hit to their bottom lineMany councils are worried about how they'll pay staff and fund servicesThe financial situation has renewed calls for the State Government to reconsider its position on council amalgamationsTheir financial stress has seen renewed calls for the State Government to ditch its policy of voluntary amalgamations and finally force some councils to merge. It was mid-April when Premier Peter Gutwein and Local Government Minister Mark Shelton wrote to councils urging them "to do more". "We strongly encourage all councils to consider their individual packages and provide support to their community as a matter of urgency," they wrote. "It is vital that all councils agree to measures including rate increase freezes and generous hardship policies."The state's councils agreed to implement hardship packages — including delaying rates collections and waiving or deferring fees — and freeze rates for the 20/21 financial year. But not all councils could afford this or agreed with the rates freeze, with some mayors saying they felt forced into doing so. For Flinders Island Council, the rates freeze is putting some serious pressure on its finances. "To all councils [the freeze] is probably a big issue, a big burden. To us, it's just off the planet," Mayor Annie Revie said. The council has been in "a high-risk category financially" since 2018 and entered into the crisis with about $2 million in debt. The extra hit means the council may be forced to sacrifice some services. "It's something we're going to have to look at. We're going to have to involve our community in what sort of services can we afford," she said. This will be a question many councils across the state will now face and, depending on the council, the loss of services could range from a pause on council-supported events and grants to delays on infrastructure upgrades and slower reparation of things like roads and street lamps. On paper, councils are asset-rich — they own parks, roads and buildings — but few of them can be sold or, as Derwent Valley Mayor Ben Shaw put it, "you can't sell a footpath". Derwent Valley Council has about $800,000 in outstanding rates for this financial year and as part of the agreed-upon hardship package, they won't be chasing them. Cr Shaw said with the council's cash flow in "disarray" he was worried about paying staff leave entitlements. "We're around about the $1 million mark [in leave entitlements] on our books, which is a real concern. We need to have that cash available plus we need to have operation cash as well," he said. He does not know how they will keep the hardship package and implement a freeze on rates. "If it all comes in and all our rates come in, we'll be fine," he said. "It's the fact that there's no incentive for anybody for this next 12 months to pay their rates because we won't be chasing them and there's no interest accrual on them. "If everybody decides not to pay their rates, we will run out of cash."In contrast, the New South Wales State Government has moved to allow councils to increase rates to protect them from a downturn during the coronavirus crisis, a move applauded by the business community. The predominantly council-owned body TasWater has also had to freeze rates, meaning it has not paid the councils dividends for the past six months and is unlikely to pay any next financial year — money many of the smaller councils rely on. But it's not just regional councils that are struggling. Hobart City Council has estimated that by the end of the financial year it will be down $10 million in revenue and next financial year, the worst case scenario will see it down $22 million. "We have similar challenges that most capital cities have because we all have a greater percentage of the hotels, hospitality and retail ratepayers and they're the ones that are struggling and asking for assistance," said Lord Mayor Anna Reynolds. The council has borrowed $20 million for operational purposes, including paying their staff. "Not getting access to JobKeeper was a significant blow to us, but also to local governments right around the country," said Cr Reynolds. While it initially paid all staff, Hobart's council has been forced to stand some of them down and next year's budget is likely to be more about maintenance than new projects. "We just have to make sure that we've got enough money to maintain what we have; that means there'll be less money for either new initiatives, new infrastructure or potentially some of those special festivals and events that the City of Hobart has been able to support in the past," she said. Amalgamation talk returnsTasmanian Chamber of Commerce and Industry chief executive Michael Bailey said with councils' finances in trouble, it is time the State Government reconsidered its policy on council amalgamations. "We've reached the stage where there are several councils across Tasmania who are really going to struggle to make it work, even in the medium term," he said. "It seems that amalgamating is the only way that we're going to get sensible local government in these areas."The financial case, for at least some mergers, has already been made. Tasmania has 29 councils for a population of just over 520,000 — by comparison Brisbane has one council for a population of 2.5 million. Feasibility studies commissioned in 2015 by then-local government minister Peter Gutwein found merging the four Greater Hobart councils — Hobart, Kingborough, Glenorchy and Clarence — would save $19 million per year. The creation of a great south-eastern council — which would include Clarence, Tasman, Sorell and Glamorgan Spring Bay — would save $7.6 million per year. The Government has shown a reluctance to force amalgamations, but Mr Bailey said that reform is now urgent. "What we'll see here, if we're not careful, are councils not exactly amalgamating, but almost bankrupting," he said. "Rather than neighbouring councils standing around waiting for the keys to be handed to them, what I'd prefer to see is a more strategic approach.""It makes a lot more sense for there to be strategy leading into these sorts of things rather than a collapse of a council, which I think we could genuinely be seeing in a couple of council areas across the state."But Cr Revie said she was "adamantly" against it. "We're short of money, but I believe that council in a small place like this means much more than money."In a statement, Local Government Minister Mark Shelton said the Government's position has not changed and "significant local government reforms stand the best chance of succeeding when processes are voluntary". "Councils are well-equipped to make decisions regarding how they respond to and recover from the economic effects of the coronavirus pandemic and if councils determine this should include conversations on amalgamation, then the Government will work with them on their ideas," he said.
Australia's sporting codes may face scheduling headache following coronavirus shutdown
Had you suggested a month ago that there could be too much live sport this year, it would have been assumed your COVID-19 swab had penetrated the naval cavity and become lodged in your cerebral cortex. That was back when the forecasts of any sport being played before Christmas seemed bleak and some of us ridiculed Australian Rugby League Commission chairman Peter V'landys for his preposterous insistence his competition would start on May 28. Now, in just nine days, elated fans will howl at their televisions that "one ref is still one too many!" as Pugnacious Pete's NRL leads sport back onto the field — that is, if you don't count horse racing as a sport, which many don't until the spring or autumn carnivals when, suddenly, they do. Two weeks later, the AFL will return when most anticipate Victorian giants Richmond and Collingwood will be given the honour of playing the first match, something that would no doubt thrill already disgruntled fans from Western Australia and South Australia, whose teams will be hunkered down in Queensland hubs. Then the (not so) Super Rugby could be back in early July, the A-League season completed by August (and presumably started again in October), Super Netball might be rebooted and various international events, including the golf and tennis majors (except the Open Championship and Wimbledon), could have confirmed their current tentative bookings. Most likely, there will be no crowds. But by August we will be as accustomed to watching matches played in eerily empty stadiums as we have become to having them drowned out by hysterical commentators. Which leads to the very welcome but unforeseen problem created by the requisite scheduling adjustments, a period that would challenge Roy Slaven and HG Nelson's oft-repeated rule of thumb: too much sport is barely enough. By extending the NRL and AFL seasons, we have notionally created an Octoberfest of sport where the footy finals will collide with the spring racing carnival and potentially the men's ICC T20 World Cup, as well as several other global events. The AFL grand final may share October 24 with the 100th running of the Cox Plate, while on November 11 the Nine Network is scheduled to broadcast rugby league's second State of Origin encounter and a T20 World Cup semi-final, potentially featuring Australia. The second clash of events appears the least likely, given the increasing murmurs the T20 World Cup will be postponed until February or — given there is another T20 World Cup in India late next year — abandoned, especially with the Indian Premier League's operators eyeing the October/November period covetously. The AFL won't be seen to publicly death-ride the big cricket circus, given it needs to negotiate with Cricket Australia over ground access for state and community cricket. But, privately, AFL officials are hoping the T20 World Cup is at least shifted because of the potential clashes over ground availability, most obviously the MCG on grand final day. Although, assuming crowds are still not permitted in late October, the AFL's showpiece might be better accommodated as a purely TV product at the Docklands stadium or even — shock, horror! — a non-Victorian ground, given the cavernous MCG was the least atmospheric venue during the crowd-less opening round. Racing among scheduling logjamHorse racing has notionally been the one remaining attraction for sports fans in lockdown. Even if, for some of us, watching Michael Jordan reminisce about great games and even greater grudges has been a more entertaining distraction than a midweek maiden from Hawkesbury. But having been the only show in town during what is normally its downtime, horse racing will have the NRL and AFL for company during its spring carnival unless it adopts the most imaginative course and avoids the clash by moving to November. The Melbourne Cup winner is on the fence, as two horses outside it bump each other near the finish. There are no plans to move the Melbourne Cup away from the first Tuesday in November.(AAP: Michael Dodge)The suggestion the Melbourne Cup could be run on anything other than the first Tuesday in November was immediately shot down by Victoria Racing Club chief executive Neil Wilson. "Cup week is Cup week," said Wilson, adopting the kind of literalist approach to scheduling that seems to assume COVID-19 has hitherto undiagnosed respect for racing tradition. Meanwhile, the Melbourne Racing Club and Moonee Valley Racing Club are at least considering the idea of shifting the Caulfield Cup and Cox Plate respectively to November to avoid Saturday clashes with football finals. This could raise the novel problem for punters of lining up how Melbourne Cup form translates to the Caulfield Cup and the Cox Plate rather than the other way around, albeit without the annual mystery of rating international horses with exotic form over seemingly random distances. This also raises the question of why three separate clubs are required to run Melbourne racing, although it would take more than a global pandemic to modernise Australian racing's arcane governance model. At the local level, the idea of any sport being contested remains problematic, with some confusion about the application of the Australian Institute of Sport's three-staged Framework for Rebooting Sport. As the weeks tick by, various local football codes continue to weigh up the cost-effectiveness of returning to the park, while coaches of junior teams are increasingly eager to get kids kicking a ball. But while we are waiting to play sport, the scheduling jam confronting various administrations could create a wonderfully unexpected problem for viewers. A period starting in usually barren October when, as Roy and HG might say: too much sport will be bloody great!
Chinese President Xi Jinping defends coronavirus response, backs WHO-led investigation
Chinese President Xi Jinping has defended China's handling of the coronavirus outbreak, saying his country will support a "comprehensive" World Health Organization-led review into the global response after the virus is brought under control. Key points:Chinese President Xi Jinping says his country has acted with "openness and transparency" throughout the coronavirus outbreakMr Xi said China would support a WHO-led investigation into the pandemicAustralia is expected to back a draft resolution from the EU calling for an independent inquiryMr Xi told the World Health Assembly in Geneva that China had been open and transparent about the coronavirus outbreak, which started in Hubei province in late 2019, and said his country would support an investigation "conducted in an objective and impartial way". "This work needs a scientific and professional attitude, and needs to be led by the WHO," Mr Xi told the assembly via a video message. "And the principles of objectivity and fairness need to be upheld."His comments came as the US blasted the WHO's response to the pandemic and took a thinly-veiled swipe at China for an "apparent attempt to conceal" the initial outbreak, and WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus signalled an independent review would begin as soon as possible. China will also provide $US2 billion ($3.1b) over two years towards helping with the COVID-19 response, and Mr Xi promised any vaccine developed by his country would be made a global public good. Mr Xi did not indicate whether China would vote for a joint resolution by Australia and other countries calling for an independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus pandemic. He described the pandemic as the "most serious global public health emergency" since World War II and defended his country's handling of the crisis, which has come under fierce criticism from the United States and President Donald Trump. "All along we have acted with openness and transparency and responsibility," Mr Xi said. "We have turned the tide on the virus". The World Health Assembly is the annual meeting in Geneva of all 194 members of the World Health Organization, but due to coronavirus this year's assembly is being held online. US blasts WHO response, takes swipe at ChinaLast month, Mr Trump accused the WHO of being a "pipe organ for China" and on Monday his health secretary continued the attack. Without mentioning China by name, Health Secretary Alex Azar made it clear Washington considered the WHO jointly responsible. "We must be frank about one of the primary reasons this outbreak spun out of control," Mr Azar said. "There was a failure by this organisation to obtain the information that the world needed, and that failure cost many lives.""We saw that WHO failed at its core mission of information sharing and transparency when member states do not act in good faith. "This cannot ever happen again."Dr Tedros, who defended the organisation's alerts, said "WHO sounded the alarm early, and we sounded it often". When the WHO declared a global emergency on January 30, he said, there were fewer than 100 cases outside China, and no deaths. Push for independent coronavirus inquiryAustralia is one of almost 120 WHO member nations backing a European Union draft motion calling for "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of the "international health response to COVID-19". Australian Health Minister Greg Hunt delivered an address on Monday backing the EU resolution and outlined Australia's response to the crisis. "We are pleased to have support for an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation of the global response," Mr Hunt said. "We need to learn the lessons from this pandemic and ensure we have the strongest possible global health architecture, with an enhanced ability to prevent and respond to future outbreaks."Australia was the first nation after the US to call for an independent probe, including into the initial handling of the outbreak in Hubei, drawing angry protests from China. But since then, it has toned down some of its demands, while working to both toughen up — and gather support for — the EU motion. Dr Tedros, who has always promised a review, told the forum it would come "at the earliest appropriate moment" and make recommendations for the future. He received robust backing from the WHO's independent oversight panel. "Every country and every organisation must examine its response and learn from its experience," he said, adding that the review must cover "all actors in good faith". The EU resolution is expected to be debated and adopted on Tuesday.
States under pressure to reopen borders closed in a bid to contain coronavirus
National Cabinet's key health advisory committee has confirmed it never recommended internal border closures, as states and territories come under pressure to lift their restrictions and once again allow travel within Australia. Key points:National Cabinet's key health committee has never recommended state borders close to contain coronavirusA former Health Department boss says economies can't function properly while borders remain closedThe Queensland Premier is warning her state's border might be closed until SeptemberQueensland, Western Australia, South Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory all closed their borders at the height of the coronavirus crisis, either banning non-residents from entering or requiring travellers to self-quarantine for a fortnight. But as the nation begins its three-stage process of easing COVID-19 restrictions, the state of the borders remains one of the most contentious issues. Prime Minister Scott Morrison has previously said he hoped Australians could travel interstate in time for the July school holidays, but New South Wales Premier Gladys Berejiklian is urging her counterparts to "get those borders open as soon as possible". Federal Deputy Chief Medical Officer Paul Kelly said the decision to close state borders was not based on any health advice given to the National Cabinet and suggested that as the number of cases continues to fall, leaders might reconsider the measure. "At the national level, we've never suggested that internal borders within Australia should be closed," he said. "But, if you look at when those decisions were made some weeks ago, we had a rapidly increasing number of cases each day right around Australia but particularly in the south-eastern corner of the nation. "And so, when you look at what's happening now with just very few cases, only just over 100 cases in the last week and only 11 in the last 24 hours, I think that things have changed a lot."When asked about those comments on Monday, Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk stood firm, suggesting there might be no change before September, four months away. "There is still community transmission in Victoria and in New South Wales," she told ABC News Breakfast. "So as soon as my Chief Health Officer says that I can relax those restrictions, we absolutely will."Ms Palaszczuk suggested a "travel bubble" might be possible between the states that had closed their borders before they are opened to New South Wales and Victoria. However Federal Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham suggested such action could be costly and states that remain shut will need to compensate tourism businesses. "If the successful suppression of COVID-19 continues then the states should be relaxing their border controls," Senator Birmingham said. "If one or two states were to hold out then they will be answerable to their tourism industry and will ultimately need to provide additional support to that industry."Former Health Department secretary Jane Halton also questioned the need to keep internal borders closed, saying Australia's economy "doesn't work in hermetically sealed spheres". A member of the Federal Government's COVID-19 Co-ordination Commission, Ms Halton said she did not believe it was an effective way of controlling the spread of the virus. "I'm personally not convinced that our internal borders are the right way to manage our risks," she told the National Press Club. "I understand why people are nervous, but I would encourage people to think about how we maintain control, perhaps while enabling business to operate."In Western Australia, which has long joked about seceding from the rest of the nation, there is strong public support for the state's hard border, meaning it will likely be among the last restrictions eased in that state. As of Monday, WA had recorded 554 coronavirus cases, compared to 1,055 in Queensland, 1,558 in Victoria and 3,075 in New South Wales. In another sign of the country's progress in suppressing COVID-19, the National Cabinet is not due to meet for another week while the daily briefing given by the Chief Medical Officer or deputy chief medical officers is being reduced to three times a week.
Are we headed for a cashless economy post-coronavirus?
If you got the feeling cash was slowly disappearing from our daily transactions even before coronavirus hit, you were right. Key points:Cash is sometimes required in cases of financial abuse, one of the most common forms of domestic violence, with perpetrators controlling family financesThe homeless are also disadvantaged by a cashless society with people having issues with connectivityRecent research revealed 92 per cent of seniors use the internet, with 57 per cent using it for bankingAccording to the Reserve Bank's 2019 Consumer Payments Survey, Australians are increasingly preferring to use electronic payment methods — with just 27 per cent of all consumer payments made with cash, compared with 37 per cent in 2016, and 69 per cent in 2007. Within a matter of days of COVID-19 cases being diagnosed in Australia, cash suddenly became unacceptable currency in the few businesses that remained open under the newly instituted, socially isolating restrictions. So what has the decline of cash meant for people who rely on physical dollars and cents — everyone from parents handing over pocket money to more vulnerable members of the community such as seniors, the homeless, and people fleeing domestic violence?How Australians pay for goods and services: consumer survey resultsCash needed for survivalIn many cases, cash is a necessary means of survival, especially for victims of domestic violence. Financial abuse is one of the most common forms of domestic violence. Perpetrators controlling the family finances can make it difficult for victims to leave and seek refuge by limiting access to accounts, credit and debit cards, or only providing a weekly cash amount for shopping and expenses. "Most of the women that we work with would approach us and say they actually have very few resources, and that he controls everything. Property and other assets might be in his name or controlled by him," said the CEO of Bendigo's Centre for Non-Violence, Margaret Augerinos. "They may not have access to credit cards or any other banking opportunities, so that is a very common story."However, Ms Augerinos said essential crisis payments and financial support for victims of domestic violence arrive through electronic transactions. Setting up new accounts and financial planning is something domestic service support services help provide. Difficulty accessing the digital worldThe other group of vulnerable people disadvantaged by a cashless society are the homeless. Some partake in street begging to top up government support payments which are received digitally through online accounts. While many are quite "tech savvy" in terms of being able to access different technologies as payment, according to the chief operating officer for homeless and low-income support service Haven Home Safe, Trudi Ray, accessibility to the digital world can be problematic. "What we will be seeing is people having issues with connectivity, with being able to access the internet — and therefore their funds — which is certainly a concern," she said. With many of the local organisations that support people with digital access closed at the moment, there will be an impact. "We've been making sure that we are aware of where the free wi-fi hot spots are around the different municipalities, and we're able to send people to those locations if they do run out of data," Ms Ray said. "We've also talked to Telstra about some other options available to our clients, and we do offer cards that have credit to ensure their technology needs are supported."Second wave of seniors going onlineThere has been a significant uptake of technology by older Australians, which means switching from cash to cards and online banking during the pandemic has made less of an impact. Recent research from RMIT University revealed 92 per cent of seniors use the internet, with 77 per cent using it to find information and 57 per cent using it for banking. Life under a pandemic has meant use of the internet amongst seniors has increased to include social media and applications such as Zoom, Microsoft Teams, and Skype. Where once those platforms and applications were previously perceived as barriers, this is no longer the case. "[Previously seniors said] 'I'm not comfortable, I don't have the skills, I don't know how to do this'. But now that it is a necessity to stay in touch, we see that they have been able to overcome these barriers," said Dr Torgeir Aleti from RMIT University's School of Economics, Finance and Marketing. He believes we are seeing a second wave of seniors online and participating in a whole range of activities. 'Tricky time for the tooth fairy'At the other end of the age scale, earning pocket money from chores around the home and the loss of a tooth or two is a rite of passage for most children. But spending their small fortunes has gotten a little harder today. "With many families spending more time at home, parents might be using pocket money to motivate children to take on jobs around the house," said Professor Julie Green, executive director at online parenting organisation Raising Children. "In the current situation with many shops preferring cashless transactions, parents could think about substituting pocket money using coins and notes for other items such as tokens, or perhaps notes with the value of the pocket money written on them," she said. "These could then be exchanged when children have reached a saving goal or would like to spend their money. "It's a tricky time for the tooth fairy with coins not being widely accepted at the moment."Professor Green suggested parents could consider providing a little gift instead of cash when a child loses a tooth.
Electricity bill shock in store as coronavirus and cold weather bites
With all six family members of Amy Pytchin's family working and learning from her Dubbo home due to coronavirus restrictions, electricity consumption has gone through the roof. Key points:One electricity retailer says consumption is up by 40 per cent this monthMany retailers have stopped reading meters in personWith family members working from home and homeschooling, bills have soared"We're definitely expecting our next bill to be higher than usual," Ms Pychtin said. "We're running multiple computers, devices and chargers all at once. "We're trying to switch off lights and open blinds, and put on jumpers instead of heaters."Put a jumper on, nowEnergy retail boss Domenic Capomolla said the Pychtins were not alone. He estimated households were consuming 40 per cent more electricity each day than was typical for this time of year. "This May has had a colder start and there have been a lot of people at home that wouldn't normally be using heating and appliances all day long," Mr Capomolla, chief executive of Tango Energy, said. Mr Capomolla said households needed to curb usage now to avoid bill shock. "The spike in usage incredible even when you account for seasonality."Discounts helpPreparing for quarterly power bills is crucial for Steven Cassell, from Molong. The disability pensioner and his wife spend much of their time at home. Each fortnight Mr Cassell pays $150 to his electricity retailer so his account is always in credit. When his bill arrives, he pays the outstanding amount immediately and is rewarded with a 30 per cent discount. "We can't let our bills get out of control and this works really well for us."Beware of estimatesDue to social distancing requirements, many electricity retailers have stopped reading meters in person, instead, opting to estimate customers' usage based on past consumption patterns. Tambar Springs farmers Grahame and Noni Pryor urged others not to "blindly" pay bills based on estimates. "Estimates can result in stupidly high consumption figures — in our experience — 20 to 30 per cent over what you've actually used," Mrs Pryor said. Mrs Pryor said consumers should photograph their own metres where it's not possible for the retailer to do so. "It's frustrating having to phone the retailers and correct the bill but you shouldn't let anyone charge you for a good or service that you simply didn't receive," she said.
Coronavirus lockdown at Melbourne's Villa Maria aged care in Bundoora, a dozen McDonald's outlets shut
A Melbourne aged care home is in lockdown and all workers and staff will be tested for coronavirus after a resident there became a suspected coronavirus case over the weekend. Key points:Health authorities initially said the resident at the Villa Maria aged care home in Bundoora was one of Monday's new coronavirus casesThey later said the resident had returned an "inconclusive" result, but that the result was treated as positive as a precautionAll staff and residents at the home will be tested for coronavirus over the next few daysVictorian health authorities said on Monday afternoon a resident at the Villa Maria aged care facility in Bundoora was among eight new Victorian coronavirus cases. But the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) later clarified that the resident had returned an "inconclusive" test, which was being treated as positive under the health unit's policy. "This is a precautionary approach designed to minimise potential spread as quickly as possible," the statement said. "Because of the high-risk setting, the aged care facility will continue to be managed as if it were an outbreak site for at least two weeks."The ABC has asked the DHHS whether cases where people return "inconclusive" results are routinely added to the tally of coronavirus cases in Victoria. The home's operator, Villa Maria Catholic Homes (VMCH), said the entire home was in lockdown as a result and the resident, who had no symptoms, was quarantined in their room. Over the weekend, the resident was taken to hospital with a temperature of 39 degrees Celsius before returning the inconclusive test, which had since been followed by a negative test, VMCH said in a statement. "Staff who have had close contact with the person are in self-isolation at home. All other staff are being tested for COVID-19," the statement said. "Should any signs of ill health appear, we will seek medical attention immediately."It comes as a dozen McDonald's restaurants across Melbourne's north and west have been closed and hundreds of workers asked to self-isolate after a delivery driver tested positive for coronavirus. Health authorities believe the driver was a close contact of an employee at the Craigieburn McDonald's who tested positive last week. The fast-food chain says the restaurants were closed out of an "abundance of caution" and that no further employees have tested positive. Victoria announced eight new cases of coronavirus on Monday, including two close contacts of cases in a cluster linked to the Fawkner McDonald's, and three cases in hotel quarantine. The Fawkner McDonald's outlet has now been linked to 12 cases. McDonald's Australia chief executive Andrew Gregory told ABC Radio Melbourne the driver's positive test was confirmed "as late as yesterday [Sunday] afternoon" and the 12 restaurants were closed within hours of the company being told. Latest information from the Victorian Government"It’s going to impact about 1,000 staff," he said. Most of these workers are expected to return to work as the restaurants reopen in coming days with about 200, who were working during the deliveries or afterwards, asked to stay at home for two weeks. The outlet at Craigieburn was closed on Friday for cleaning after an employee — a relative of one of the cases linked to the Fawkner outlet — tested positive. A McDonald's spokesperson confirmed the restaurant closures on Monday morning. "McDonald's Australia confirms no other employees have tested positive for COVID-19 at this time," the spokesperson said in a statement. "However, out of an abundance of caution, we have made the decision to close and conduct a deep clean of 12 restaurants in Victoria, following confirmation a truck driver for an external service provider has tested positive for COVID-19. "The truck driver made deliveries to 12 restaurants and interacted with a small number of restaurant employees on each occasion while asymptomatic and unaware they had contracted COVID-19."Potential close contacts and employees who worked shifts during and after the driver's deliveries had been told not to return to work for 14 days and to get tested, the spokesperson said. "The Department of Health has identified the truck driver as a workplace close contact of the previously announced Craigieburn COVID-19 case."The spokesperson said McDonald's would reopen each of the restaurants after the deep cleans were completed and when replacement workers were available. The closed restaurants are:Melton EastLaverton NorthYallambieTaylors LakesCampbellfieldSunburyHoppers CrossingRiverdale VillageSandownCalder Highway Northbound/OutboundCalder Highway Southbound/InboundBP Rockbank Service Centre OutboundPremier says outbreak a 'really big concern'Premier Daniel Andrews told Channel Nine this morning any outbreak, particularly one involving a case with no symptoms, was "obviously a really big concern". He said the McDonald's cluster highlighted how rapidly the virus spread and why testing was so important. "We're going to see more of these outbreaks," Mr Andrews said. "The Prime Minister has made that clear. "I've made the point that it's going to be part of this virus as it presents in the weeks and months to come and that's why we've all boosted our teams right across the country to be able to track, trace and respond really quickly to outbreaks."The Premier added that the state's public health team were "very confident" about Monday's reopening of Cedar Meats' Brooklyn abattoir, which has been linked to 100 cases. "I think there's about 20 staff going back in there," he said. "They're working in one particular part of that business in the cold storage part of that business. "That's a significant outbreak but one that the Chief Medical Officer, Brendan Murphy, has made clear has been handled very well by the public health team."Single case closes two Melbourne businessesMeanwhile, a Domino's restaurant in Fairfield and a mattress and foam manufacturer in Deer Park were closed on Friday after man who worked at both businesses tested positive to coronavirus. A spokesperson for the pizza chain said in a statement the employee last worked at the Fairfield restaurant on May 8 and was asymptomatic at the time. The store was undergoing a "full environmental clean" and would be reopened on May 23, the statement said. "Upon being notified of the positive test result, Domino’s immediately closed this store, notified all Fairfield store team members and their families, and recommended everyone self-isolate and seek testing," it said. Comfort Group chief executive Peter Mullin said the same man worked at the company's Deer Park manufacturing facility. Mr Mullin said the employee began suffering cold-like symptoms and got tested the weekend of May 9 and 10 and had not been to work since. The factory was shut on Friday after the test results came back on Thursday night. Mr Mullin said the facility was being deep-cleaned over the weekend and would remain closed until Wednesday. About 200 people who had been at the factory since April 10 were being tested, he added. "We've been implementing stringent practices and distancing protocols including segregated meal break breaks and separating workers," he said. The company had identified only three people who would be classified as "close contacts" of the infected employee and two of them had already tested negative, he added.
Coronavirus crisis a 'heaven-sent opportunity' to reset national park tourism, advocates say
As a national parks advocate, Nick Sawyer has been more frustrated than most by the coronavirus-crisis park closures, but he's seeing them as a chance rethink tourism. Key points:There are calls for a more sustainable use of reopening National Parks with less overcrowding rather than new infrastructureSustainability is seen as an important factor, with an industry less reliance on cruise ships and planesFamily and friends visiting each other will be the first wave of tourism recovery as the mode, price and destination of travel changesMr Sawyer, president of Tasmania's National Parks Association, has witnessed the boom in the state's industry in recent years, as its natural wonders like Cradle Mountain and Wineglass Bay draw tourists from the mainland and around the globe. He thinks the pandemic shutdown of Australia's parks and the devastation of the tourism industry should be seized as an opportunity to look outside the box as we rebuild. "This is a heaven-sent opportunity to rethink the whole approach," he said. For Mr Sawyer, better ways of managing the return of tourists and eventually their booming numbers won't necessarily mean more infrastructure, like dedicated walkways, viewing platforms and handrails. "For example, the very popular Wineglass Bay lookout [in Tasmania] is becoming too crowded, so the response [has been to consider building] a second lookout nearby," he said. "You don't need a second lookout. "You could try and space the tourists more evenly over the course of the day, thereby avoiding the worst of the crowding and giving them a much better experience."He points to shuttle bus systems as an example of a way visitor numbers could be managed at Wineglass Bay, to "avoid having to expand the car park, yet again". Mr Sawyer is among a growing number of voices suggesting the reopening of national parks across Australia presents an opportunity for a reset in the way Australia's natural wonders are managed. Tourism Australia managing director Phillipa Harrison said the reopening of parks would ignite people's interest in new ways of travelling. "There has been a rising interest in sustainability, and making sure you leave a light footprint when you travel," she said. "We think this is going to accelerate people's desire to travel more sustainably."University of Queensland Associate Professor Judith Mair said the pandemic had highlighted a myriad of ways Australia's tourism industry could be more sustainable, and not just when it came to tackling overcrowding. "It might be putting too much reliance on one sole market, it might be relying too much on cruise tourists, it might be involving the local community in decision-making," she said. "There are a lot of ways in which tourism could come back better than it was before."Tasmanian wildlife park operator Gena Cantwell said a financially sustainable attraction was now front-of-mind. Her park relied on the 40 cruise ships that were visiting Tasmania's north-west each year before an outbreak of coronavirus at the North West Regional Hospital in Burnie forced the strictest lock-down measures in the country. Ms Cantwell said she was forced to stand down some staff, and look for ways to retain keepers and feed animals. "It was horrible. It was probably one of the hardest days that we had to deal with here," she said. "It will always be in the back of our minds about how something like this can affect us so broadly. "It was surprising how quickly a virus can bring everything unstuck."After lockdown ends she said she would look to the local market, and locals' relatives, to help reopen the operation, but could not envision staff numbers increasing for some time. "I don't imagine that the international tourists or even the mainland tourists are going to come in any hurry," she said. "They're going to be a little bit scared, so we're just going to have to look and focus on what we can do for our local market and our staff. "I think our tourism bodies are going to have to do a fair bit of damage control."Tourism Australia said it was on the case, but the price, destination and mode of tourism travel would change. "We really are looking to our domestic market to get our industry back on their feet again," Ms Harrison said. "We probably will see for a little while people wanting to control their own environment a little more, so we do expect to see people staying a little closer to home and taking their own transport."That might mean people using hire cars over planes and buses, or choosing short-stay accommodation over hotels and buffet breakfasts. "This is a new normal for tourist operators," she said. "They are going to have to work out how they can run their businesses economically and work out how they make money with the new regulations around social distancing."sMoney on the minds of tourists and operatorsAssociation Professor Mair believes people will have less money to spend, and that will be reflected in what's on offer. "People tend to think of tourism as a recovery vehicle for a destination, so it's about getting people back in and spending their money in a destination as soon as possible," she said. "Initially that will be very localised, so you might be travelling from Brisbane to the Gold Coast, or Melbourne to Mornington. "They'll have to be value-added experiences offered, so perhaps hotels or accommodation might do three nights for the price of two."Nick Sawyer suggested any government's stimulus funding for the tourism industry should aim to draw people to lesser-known national parks, rather than well-known attractions. "There's a huge maintenance backlog of existing facilities," he said. "In a lot of our parks, the facilities in the remote areas are getting terribly run down."The lesser-known attractions will also be the focus of Tourism Australia's campaigns. "I think people think they know what there is to see and do in Australia," Ms Harrison said. "But there has been so much development in the last decade particularly."The industry group is going to encourage Australians to reignite their love for the road trip, and visit friends and family in initial stages, before widening their scope. "We are going to be promoting some really great road trips you can do either intrastate or interstate, and also some great epic national road trips."
Rockhampton aged care emergency sparks second investigation after nurse tests positive to coronavirus
Queensland Health says there will be an independent investigation into how a nurse with coronavirus continued to work at a Rockhampton aged care home, while showing symptoms. Key points:More than 600 people were tested for COVID-19 at fever clinics in Rockhampton at the weekendA separate 200 staff and residents of an aged care home have tested negative to the virus, after a nurse who worked there tested positive. More than 40 nurses are in isolation and 20 have been deployed from southern parts of the state to assistHealth Minister Steven Miles said he has asked the department's director-general to commission the investigation. "We want to understand exactly how it happened, what went wrong, why it went wrong and how we can make sure it never happens again," he said. "Not just at the 16 aged care facilities run at HHS but also at our Queensland Health sites. "We need to ensure all of our patients and residents in our care are kept safe."The Central Queensland Hospital and Health Service has also launched an investigation. More than 40 nurses are in self-isolation and hundreds of people are awaiting coronavirus test results after the nurse tested positive to COVID-19 last week and the aged care facility went into lockdown. The nurses — who worked in the same unit as the nurse who tested positive — have all tested negative but will be in isolation for two weeks in case they show symptoms and have to be retested. Mr Miles said 35 residents were moved from the aged care centre to other facilities across Rockhampton over the weekend to enable residents to have private rooms. "That has allowed residents to be moved around in the facility and have private rooms where they can be isolated with their own bathrooms, and infection control can be implemented," he said. Mr Miles said 763 Rockhampton locals were tested over the weekend and of the returned results, none have been positive. Not clear how nurse contracted virusChief Health Officer Dr Jeannette Young said all staff and residents from the facility will be closely monitored for a two-week period. "All of the 114 residents who were in the facility at the time the enrolled nurse was working in the facility have been tested and all of them are negative," she said. "Plus all of the staff who have worked at the facility for the last month have now been tested — except for one who's been on leave — all of those staff have been tested and are negative."Dr Young said she hoped the two investigations would get to the bottom of why the nurse continued to work while displaying symptoms and after being tested. "I've been very disappointed that happened," she said. "Since she [the nurse] had the confirmed result she has been extremely cooperative and has worked very closely with us, and indeed agreed to a second test. "Prior to then we need to work out what exactly happened."Dr Young said Queensland Health was still trying to work out how the nurse contracted coronavirus. "At this stage we still don't know whether she contracted the infection on one of the two flights that she was on to go down to Brisbane and back to Rockhampton, or whether it was in Brisbane itself — we don't know," she said. "She is a community-acquired case, we know it's unlikely she acquired it here in Rockhampton because it's so long since you had a confirmed case, but of course that still is possible."Nurses sent from southern QueenslandMedical staff from southern Queensland, including about 20 nurses, have been flown in to assist in hospitals, fever clinics and aged care facilities as the number of people stepping forward for testing increases. The crisis was sparked after an enrolled nurse, who is understood to have worked in reception at the state-run North Rockhampton Nursing Centre, tested positive to coronavirus last Thursday. The nurse is believed to have been contagious since May 3 and continued working while showing symptoms. She returned to her workplace after being sent for coronavirus testing, but before her results came back. Queensland Health is investigating the circumstances, including whether the nurse was checked for fever every day, as per requirements for all aged care facilities. A spokesperson for Queensland Health said all contacts were being closely monitored and secondary testing would be conducted if any of these individuals showed symptoms. Nurses in self-isolationCentral Queensland Hospital and Health Service said more than 600 people have been tested for the coronavirus at fever clinics in Rockhampton since Friday, and that more 5,000 calls had been made to the coronavirus hotline. Grant Burton from the Queensland Nurses and Midwifery Union said more than 40 nurses in the Rockhampton region had gone into isolation until they received their test results. "The fact that 41 or 42 staff have now been [self-isolated] at home has certainly been a challenge," he said. "Health services have risen to that and have staff flying in to assist."Mr Burton said union representatives were working with Queensland Health to ensure additional staff would be sent to Rockhampton if required in the coming days. "Staff are coming from Metro North and South with further discussions with Wide Bay and Darling Downs," he said. "They will be where they're needed — whether that's the fever clinic, the general hospital or the aged care centre."There are now two fever clinics in Rockhampton, with others at Yeppoon and Gladstone. Mr Burton said with increased demand for nursing and health services, it was important for those on the front line to remember their own health. "They certainly go above and beyond, and they feel the need to come to work, but the message is clear — if you are sick, stay home," he said. "There is additional staff coming in and we will be working in collaboration with the service to identify any areas that are running short."'Eerily like Newmarch House'Aged and Disability Advocacy Australia (ADA) is a Commonwealth-funded group which provides support to older people using aged care, and their families and carers. After hearing from families at Sydney's Newmarch House, CEO Geoff Rowe said he was "disturbed" to learn about the news in Rockhampton on Friday. "It is eerily like what has happened at Newmarch House," he said. "The infection was brought into an aged care facility in Sydney by a staff person who was unwell. "What we're seeing coming out of the North Rockhampton Nursing Centre is very encouraging, we're seeing a very proactive response. What we saw at Newmarch was a very slow response."Mr Rowe said it could be a stressful and traumatic time for central Queensland families. "It's not unusual, based on our experience with Newmarch in Sydney, for family members to be feeling left out of the loop and to learn what is happening on the news, which is very distressing," he said. "A lot of family members concerns were similar or the same, it was often around the lack of communication, the lack of any knowledge of what was happening with the family member. "I think what we're seeing at the moment at the [North Rockhampton Nursing] Centre is quite a calculated and a careful response and unfortunately families need to be patient."He said the advocacy group was open to providing weekly video link updates, similar to what has been done for Newmarch House families, to improve communication if families reach out. Residents and families can contact ADA on their 1800 700 600 hotline between 6:00am and 10:00pm everyday for support.
Coronavirus sparked an economic recession that takes more jobs from women than men
The coronavirus pandemic ravaging the planet has laid bare the unequal toll the virus is having on many segments of society, namely minorities and the disadvantaged. There are fewer places this is more profound than the United States. In a country that was unequal prior to the outbreak, the pandemic has exacerbated its racial inequalities, revealed its wealth disparities and exposed gaping holes in its social safety net. Putting the health crisis aside, the economic collapse triggered by the shutdown has been nothing short of staggering. It too has revealed another disparity. More than 33 million Americans have lost their jobs, and for the first time in decades, the face of this financial catastrophe is a predominately female one. If you break down the numbers even further, it's affecting women of colour the most. But this phenomenon isn't limited to the world's largest economy. Global blanket shutdowns and social distancing measures are shattering female-dominated industries like retail, hospitality, education and healthcare. Female unemployment rate hits 15 per cent"It is a she-cession," said Institute for Women's Policy Research president, C Nicole Mason. "What I mean by that is that women have been disproportionately impacted by the job losses over the past couple of months."More than half of the jobs lost in the US during April were held by women. Since February, female unemployment has jumped five-fold to 15 per cent. By comparison, the jobless rate for men was 13 per cent. It's a stark contrast to the global financial crisis, in which men largely shouldered the losses in the financial and construction sectors. Tina Edwards is among the millions at the forefront of this crisis. "I want to say we go back and reopen. But survive? I'm not sure," she said. The mother of six owns a day spa in Washington DC, and like so many other businesses, she was forced to close her doors. So far, her applications for small business and unemployment benefits have been rejected by America's social security system. "I personally don't believe we will reopen until July or August and even then, we won't be 50 per cent of the business we were."Her family used the Federal Government's one-off stimulus cheque to pay bills but with that now spent, she's eating into her emergency savings to make ends meet. "I don't know how, with one income, it's going to work," she said. "This is a really long emergency. With no extra income, we've never been down to just one income. "I know worst case, there are resources we can take advantage of. We haven't got there yet, but I wouldn't doubt I'd ask for assistance if I needed it."Women make up 70 per cent of global healthcare workforceThe April jobs numbers are a stunning and disappointing reversal from a major milestone in December, when women held more payroll jobs than men for the first time in about a decade. The losses are being felt across the globe including Australia. The official jobless figures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics show the number of jobs slumped by 8.1 per cent for women, compared to 6.2 per cent for men. Between mid-March and mid-April, 55 per cent of the jobs lost were held by women. There's no question working from home in a white-collar job is easier in this day and age of internet connectivity. More to the point, for those in roles that require close contact with people, there is no alternative. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has warned the pandemic throws up compounding burdens for women. Firstly, they make up 70 per cent of the global healthcare workforce, meaning they are more likely to be on the frontline treating people who are fighting the disease. They also make up the majority of employees in the parts of the economy that have been hardest hit by the lockdowns. Some women are taking on additional childcare burdensAmid it all, they continue to do most of the unpaid care work within the home, which has in some cases forced women to reduce their hours or leave their job to care for their children. This has been more pronounced in countries like the US, where schools and day care centres have been shuttered across the country for months, adding home-schooling to the list of chores. "They are struggling to put food on the table but they're also struggling to meet their primary care responsibilities," Ms Mason said. She said research by her institute showed 30 million women in the US with children under the age of 13 provided 40 per cent of their household income. "So, this pandemic will have a devastating impact on those families where women are the sole or primary breadwinner," she said. The big, unknown question is how long the shutdowns will last, which will determine how deep and painful the downturn will be. The road to recovery is still hard to visualiseThe unfolding crisis in countries hit hardest, like America, could hamper the road to recovery with many economists warning there won't be a one-for-one replacement in jobs lost. "Are those companies going to be able to rehire those people? That we just don't know," University of Michigan's Justin Wolfers said. "How many bankruptcies are we going to see? How much downsizing are we going to see?"If those temporary layoffs become permanent. That's when this moves from being a short, sharp shock to a long, deep ongoing recession," he said. In past economic crises, countries have wrestled their way out with government-backed nation building infrastructure projects. But if the danger of catching the virus continues to linger or a second wave hits, that might not be enough to drag the world out of this slumber.
Complex coronavirus travel refund process leaves couple $20,000 out of pocket
A Melbourne couple has been left $20,000 out of pocket after their South African odyssey was cancelled because of coronavirus restrictions. Key points:Thousands of traveller are complaining about being refused refunds in social media support groupsOne industry expert says the refund process is complex, with multiple providers often involvedThe ACCC says consumer guarantees are unlikely to apply where travel is shut down by governmentBrigid and Don Burnard booked a $33,798 package holiday with Imagine Cruising which included a luxury cruise, rail adventure and safari. The company agreed to refund a third of the payment, but $20,246 remains outstanding, offered as a travel credit for the same itinerary in the future. Ms Burnard said due to her husband's ill health, and the fact it could be years before they can safely travel again due to coronavirus, a credit was "out of the question". "He turns 89 in August. It is impossible to even fathom him planning to go on any long trip," she said. The Burnards are not alone in their frustration, with thousands of consumers joining social media support groups after having their request for refunds refused. Facebook groups like Flight Centre Class Action Australia, Luxury Escaped Us and MSC Cancelled Cruise Group for Australians reveal the frustration of customers left out of pocket. Managing director of the Council of Australian Tour Operators Brett Jardine said travel companies were doing it tough and it would be a "far better outcome for all concerned" if customers agreed to postpone their trip, instead of cancelling. Mr Jardine said the refund process was not always straightforward, due to the complex nature of travel-provider networks. "Within that supply chain, there are travel agents, tour operators, wholesalers, destination management companies," Mr Jardine said. "The money can be caught up anywhere within that ecosystem, and there are binding agreements within each of those layers."An advertisement for a luxury African holiday torn out of a newspaper. An advertisement for the Imagine Cruising holiday that was meant to depart in March.(ABC News: Alison Xiao)The Australian Consumer Competition Commission (ACCC) said a consumer's right to a refund was governed by individual terms and conditions. "Where travel has been shut down by government action, the consumer guarantees are unlikely to apply," it said in a statement. Ms Burnard said chasing up the company had been stressful and confusing. "It seems to be that it's deliberately made difficult, so they don't have to give you answers," she said. "You think 'what can I do next?'. And there doesn't seem to be anywhere else to turn."Travellers who may be experiencing similar issues to the Burnards can find advice through Choice, the ACCC and state consumer protection bodies. Law firm Slater and Gordon are also investigating a class action against major travel providers. The Burnards said they would keep fighting, even though the process had been tiring and painful. "It's just been a drawn-out saga … it just gets us down," Ms Burnard said. Imagine Cruising has been contacted for comment. After this story was published, the company told the ABC the couple would get a full refund "in due course". The company said is was doing its "very best" to find favourable options for their customers, but that confirming refund details with suppliers was "proving to be challenging and time consuming".
Greens demand job guarantees and free education for young people in coronavirus recovery plan
Anyone under 30 would be guaranteed a job, a better income or a free place at a university or TAFE, under a new policy position the federal Greens have launched in response to the coronavirus pandemic. Key points:The Greens want the Government to take on billions of debt to rebuild the economyThe party is warning young people are at risk of facing long-term unemploymentThe Government has cautioned future generations would have to pay for its spendingThe crossbench party wants the Federal Government to take on tens of billions of dollars of debt in a bid to rebuild the Australian economy after COVID-19. Leader Adam Bandt accused the Coalition and Labor of having responded to the crisis with austerity measures, rather than billions in new spending to reshape Australia in a post-COVID environment. "Young people have been smashed by the corona crisis," he said. "If we don't offer every young person a job, a study place or a decent income, we risk creating a lost generation."The Federal Government has allocated more than $230 billion to coronavirus-stimulus measures, including a $130 billion six-month wage subsidy for six million workers. The Government has also doubled the JobSeeker payment, previously called Newstart. Labor has backed both measures but wants the JobKeeper program to be extended to include more casual workers, with leader Anthony Albanese urging the Government to channel Australia's former wartime prime ministers to reshape the Australian economy. He wants the Government to build high-speed rail, decentralise services and revitalise the nation's manufacturing sector. But the Greens want the Coalition to go even further. "If we don't, the cost will be very, very high," Mr Bandt told the ABC. "We learnt from the global financial crisis that for young people who are starting their working lives at a time of recession, they carry the scars with them for life unless they're given the opportunity of good, decent work with decent security working on meaningful projects. "We owe this to young people because otherwise we'll be stuck paying for income support for a very long time for what could be a lost generation."Dubbed Invest To Recover, the Greens' plan seeks to create almost 900,000 jobs building renewable energy infrastructure in the public and private sectors. It also seeks to spend $60 billion to revive domestic manufacturing and processing. The arts would receive billions, to support a sector that has missed out on the JobKeeper $1,500-a-fortnight payment. The Greens want a $2.3 billion entertainment and creative industries fund to put artists into every school and library in Australia. The fund would also pay for festivals, films and live performances. The Government has repeatedly said the doubling of the JobSeeker payment, to $1,100 a fortnight, was only a temporary measure. Mr Bandt said the Greens would use their Senate crossbench numbers to fight any effort to return the payment to $550 a fortnight. Labor has also indicated it would fight any effort to return JobSeeker to its previous rate. Mr Bandt said it was incumbent upon the Government to act as a "safety-net employer", in guaranteeing work to people until the private sector rehired the 1 million people who have lost their jobs due to coronavirus. The Greens' call for a debt-laden approach to Government spending is all but certain to be rejected by the Coalition. Conservative commentators and some within the Government's backbench are already pushing for the Coalition to use a pre-planned June review of JobKeeper to cut back the program. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg has given no indication that was likely, but has warned about the economic toll additional spending would have on future generations. "Australians know there is no money tree," he told the Parliament last week. "What we borrow today, we must repay in the future. "Temporary and targeted, the new spending measures were not designed to go forever but to build a bridge to the recovery phase."
Coalition of 62 countries backs joint Australian, EU push for independent inquiry into coronavirus outbreak
A coalition of 62 countries has backed a joint Australian and European Union push for an independent inquiry into the coronavirus outbreak ahead of a crucial World Health Assembly (WHA) meeting on Monday in Geneva. Key points:European nations and Australia have been rallying support for a draft EU motionThe motion does not specifically mention China or the city of WuhanAt this stage neither China nor the US have backed the motionAustralia was the first nation to call for an independent inquiry into how the coronavirus started. That drew furious condemnation from Beijing, which accused Australia of launching a political attack on China. But international support for the idea has been steadily growing. The Morrison Government has now swung its diplomatic firepower behind the European Union, which has also been pressing for an investigation while taking a more conciliatory line with Beijing. European nations and Australia have been rallying support for a draft EU motion which calls for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of "the WHO-coordinated international health response to COVID-19". The motion does not specifically mention China or the city of Wuhan where the outbreak is believed to have begun. Coronavirus investigation call made Australia a targetAustralia experienced astonishing hostility from our Chinese trading partner after calling for an inquiry into the start of the outbreak — but we're not the only ones feeling their wrath, writes Andrew Probyn. Australian Government sources said the language was strong enough to ensure that a proper and thorough investigation took place, although they are still calling this a "first step" towards ensuring transparency. At this stage neither China nor the US have backed the motion. EU and Australian diplomats were still working on Sunday to convince both major powers to give their support. In a statement, Foreign Affairs Minister Marise Payne said: "There is positive support for an independent review into the pandemic to help the world learn the lessons necessary to protect global health. "Australia and a significant number of countries are co-sponsoring the EU-led resolution, which includes a call for an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation. "This is about collaborating to equip the international community to better prevent or counter the next pandemic and keep our citizens safe."The EU's spokeswoman for foreign affairs, Virginie Battu-Henriksson, said the organisation was focused on reaching a consensus for an inquiry. "Of course, we need to have the support of all the major players, and China is one of them," she told the ABC. Meanwhile, US diplomats have been pressing for tougher language that specifically calls for a probe into how the virus started in the Chinese city of Wuhan. US President Donald Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo have both furiously denounced China's initial response to the virus, accusing it of covering up the initial outbreak and allowing it to spread around the world. But Ms Battu-Henriksson said the EU was focused on "really getting together and finding a solution which is workable for all". "For us, it is not the moment for us to enter any kind of blame game as we've seen in narratives from one part or another of the world," she said.
Nurses praised for rapidly upskilling amid coronavirus threat
Wollongong registered nurse Carmen Wood is among many across the nation who have volunteered to rapidly upskill as part of preparations and response to the coronavirus threat. Key points:Nurses from different departments in hospitals are volunteering to upskill to intensive care to help in the COVID-19 crisisSenior colleagues have praised the nurses for their response and speed at upskillingThe rapid upskill is providing hospitals with greater capacity for any potential second waveMs Wood worked in intensive care almost a decade ago and said when the call went out for more staff to return to ICU she wanted to help her colleagues. "Physical risks didn't actually cross my mind, I have been working as a nurse for 12 years and never in my career did I feel at risk," she said. But it took a week for her to weigh up the potential emotional impact. "Some of my deep concerns were what I was seeing overseas — images and stories of staff in Italy, the UK and Spain," she said. "I was also trying to prepare myself for the worst, that meant potentially having patients pass away in our unit without any of their family beside them."Rapid upskillMs Wood said she was impressed by the speedy creation of education resources and enjoyed working with a buddy for on-the-job training. "Getting my head around the electronic medical records system 'eRIC' has been one that has taken me a bit of time, and getting my head around the medications that we give in intensive care," she said. "You'll find that a lot of the medication in intensive care aren't given in any other ward in the hospital, so there is a lot more complexity there."Fast response praisedA surgeon, wearing scrubs, stands outside a regional hospital"They are putting themselves in uncomfortable situations, and to be honest what we are doing anyway is an uncomfortable situation around the pandemic, so they have said as if that isn't enough we are going to retrain as well," Dr Ashford said. "Suddenly they not only have to understand the complex machinery, but complex patients, and that is a pretty big challenge."The hospital's director of nursing and midwifery, Kathleen Thorpe, said she was incredibly proud of her team. "Not one minute has been wasted, everything is about preparedness and planning, and not just for next week, but for the many months ahead that this could take," Ms Thorpe said. "As for the bravery, I remember one of the first days telling staff we were changing the patient acuity they have and there were two new graduates who put up their hands and said 'This is what I have been waiting for'. It does give you goosebumps."Creating capacity for possible second waveWhile local staff had not faced the surge of COVID-19 cases as experienced in some countries, Dr Ashford knew there could still be a challenge ahead. "A lot of people who put their hand up originally thought they were putting their hand up to go into a storm, but it's ended up being a calm day, so that is making the decision more difficult for people who are thinking, why did I bother doing this?""But this gives us a capacity that would not be possible without them putting their hands up."With International Nurses Day last week, Ms Wood said she was incredibly proud of what she and her colleagues had achieved in such a short space of time. "Coming together and delivering the best care they can in a such a stressful time," she said.
Coronavirus put the brakes on the Gold Coast's super-fast growth, so what's next?
Some people believe coronavirus has given the Gold Coast time to slow down and reconsider the pace of development, while others say more construction is needed to kickstart the local economy. Key points:The Gold Coast expected to grow by 350,000, bringing its population to about 1 million by 2041The construction sector has warned building approvals could drop by 45 per cent due to coronavirusA developer says the industry is key to economic revival but a community group has called for a rethinkThe comments come as the city's population growth faces hiccups and the construction industry warns of a massive downturn. The President of Community Alliance Association, John Hicks, has been a vocal opponent of what he says are "excessive relaxations" of the council's City Plan — a guideline for the scope and scale of developments. "It will be a useful breathing space to have that conversation with the wider community without hectic pressures from very fast-paced development," he said. "We should use that time wisely to have a good think about the sort of city we are building."But with the construction sector employing up to 10 per cent of the Gold Coast's workforce, one developer has called for "more of the same" to help the city's economic recovery. 'Couple of bridges' to crossMaster Builders Queensland has warned the number of building approvals in the region could drop by 45 per cent. Developer Greg Rix said maintaining the Gold Coast's strong population growth was vital but there were "a couple of bridges" to cross first, including restrictions on international travel. "We're getting between 12,000 to 15,000 new people moving to the Gold Coast per annum, quite a large number of those are overseas investors," he said. "Interstate people migrating to the Gold Coast, financially, do they still have the ability to move to an area like our own?"If you don't have buyers, it's no good building projects."Mr Rix said a number of projects had been put on hold as the industry came to terms with the economic fallout of coronavirus. "The uncertainty will be the migration of people continuing to come to the Gold Coast," he said. "We have relied on overseas markets, that is a given, whether that overseas market returns at the same level or how long it takes to return, will affect the rollout of development on the Gold Coast."'Balance is tipped in favour' of developersMr Hicks said it was "business as usual" at Gold Coast City Council, despite four new councillors being elected in March. "We think it's business that's leading us down to city development more akin to Gotham City by the sea than a world-class sub-tropical leafy city". "Things need to be improved," he said. Mr Hicks said height and density limits in the City Plan had been relaxed too often, resulting in "overscale buildings with a very poor resident experience in adjacent properties". "The balance is tipped in favour strongly of the developer and we acknowledge that balance needs to be returned to a better place where the interests of the community and the developer are better balanced."A spokesperson for the City of Gold Coast said "it would not be considered appropriate for Council to hold regular town hall meetings in relation to developments". "Public notification requirements are stipulated within the State’s Planning Act. Town Hall meetings would not be appropriate in the context of statutory timeframes that are also mandated by the Planning Act."Development a 'backbone' of the Gold Coast's economyMr Rix said development had been "one of the backbones of the Gold Coast economy" but there would be "repercussions on settlement into our community which of course affects development and construction". "You won't see overseas travel into Australia probably till next year so that means that even when we're fired up in the economy we won't have those overseas investments," he said. "There may well be projects that were earmarked for construction this year delayed."But he said "post the virus, you're going to need employment" and that development meant more "people spending money at shopping centres, at schools". "The positive side is that the Gold Coast is still the premiere place to live in Australia and I believe we will see development continue to go forward."Mr Hicks said he was yet to see any significant drop on development proposals but that projects which fall outside of the City Plan should be rejected. "We're yet see the cranes disappear from the horizon. "We know we have to grow, that's acknowledged, but we just have to do it well," he said.
Protests against coronavirus lockdown measures spread in the UK and across Europe
Police in London have arrested 19 people for deliberately breaking social distancing guidelines to protest against the rules, as demonstrations against coronavirus lockdown measures swept across Europe. Key points:Protests against coronavirus measures were held in major cities such as London and BerlinIn Spain, protesters denounced the Government as communists seeking to ruin the countryProtesters in Poland carried signs reading "Work and bread" and "It will be normal again"The Metropolitan Police said a group in central London's Hyde Park had been protesting about the Government's response to the COVID-19 pandemic and had failed to comply with repeated requests to disperse. Police officers were seen taking away protesters, including the brother of Britain's former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, Piers Corbyn. The protests occurred on the first weekend since Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced a slight loosening of England's lockdown. Mr Johnson announced a limited easing of Britain's coronavirus lockdown, adopting a cautious approach to try to ensure there was no second peak of infections that could further hurt the economy and cost lives. The country has been in lockdown since March 23. An unidentified woman wearing a mask took part in the protest holding a sign that said "stop violating our human rights". "I'm protesting because they are violating our rights and I'm against mandatory vaccination. It should be a free choice and I will not be putting poison into my body," she said. A total of 34,466 people have died in the United Kingdom and 236,711 cases were registered. "It was disappointing that a relatively small group in Hyde Park came together to protest the regulations in clear breach of the guidance, putting themselves and others at risk of infection," Laurence Taylor, Deputy Assistant Commissioner at the Metropolitan Police, said in a statement. 'Covidiots' gather to protests restrictions in GermanyIn Germany, thousands of people across the country took to the streets on Saturday to protest against restrictions. Germany's death toll from the virus has been lower than most of its European neighbours and some lockdown measures have already been relaxed. However, protests against the measures Chancellor Angela Merkel insists are needed to slow down the coronavirus outbreak have become more vocal and demonstrators have filled the streets for the second weekend in a row. Derided on social media as "covidiots" who risk causing a second wave of infections that could lead to a tightening of restrictions, protesters staged demonstrations at several locations across the capital Berlin and the surrounding state of Brandenburg. In Munich, organisers asked authorities to give the green light for a rally of up to 10,000 people on the Thersienwiese, a large square in the city centre on which Munich normally stages its world famous Oktoberfest beer festival. But city officials pointed to the need to respect social distancing rules and allowed a demonstration of up to 1,000 people. The hard core of protesters is being led by several new groups. One group is Resistance 2020, led by a lawyer from eastern Leipzig and a doctor from south-western Germany who question official corona statistics and view the main political parties as constructs of an elitist rule. Another group called COMPACT describes itself as the "sharp sword against imperial propaganda". It declares on its website that it is helping the "information offensive" for the growing protest movement. German media have suggested Russia could be behind a misinformation campaign that is spurring on protesters. After winning global respect for keeping the death rate low in Germany, Ms Merkel last week bowed to pressure from some of Germany's powerful regional premiers and agreed to a gradual re-opening of schools, shops and restaurants and even football. However, Ms Merkel, a scientist, has repeatedly warned about a second wave of infections, and a brief uptick in the reproduction rate to above the critical threshold of 1 earlier this week caused fresh concern. The new coronavirus has so far infected more than 173,000 people in Germany and killed nearly 7,900. Most Germans approve Ms Merkel's crisis management, with polls showing support for her conservative CDU/CSU alliance surging to 40 per cent. Dozens arrested in PolandDozens of people, including a senator, were detained during a protest of business owners in the Polish capital against restrictions brought in to tackle the new coronavirus. Warsaw police used tear gas against protesters, intervening in the demonstration after the city's administrators claimed the gathering was illegal because it had not been previously approved. Jacek Bury, a senator for the opposition Civic Platform party, said he was hurt by police when trying to defend another protester. Police said in a statement that public gatherings were still banned under government restrictions. "Unfortunately we are dealing with cases of aggression towards police. Due to the attacks on civil servants, we used methods of direct confrontation such as physical force and [tear] gas," the Warsaw police said in a tweet. However, police denied using force against Mr Bury — something that he claimed was a lie. Poland imposed a strict lockdown in mid-March, and while the restrictions affecting the country's economy are being slowly loosened, many business people say there are still too many. Protesters carrying signs saying, "Work and bread" and "It will be normal again" gathered in Warsaw's Old Town, saying restrictions need to be lifted further in order for them to sustain their livelihoods. Hair salons and restaurants are expected to reopen with new safety measures in place on Monday. Poland, with 38 million people, has more than 18,000 confirmed infections of the new virus and more than 900 deaths. Spaniards call on government to resignProtests sprang up around Spain on Saturday, with demonstrators gathering to bang pots and pans and call for the government to resign. At the largest such demonstration, in Madrid's wealthy Salamanca neighbourhood, several hundred people gathered despite the efforts of police to enforce social-distancing. Carrying Spanish flags and crying "viva Espana!" some denounced the leftist Government as communists seeking to ruin the country. "I am against all the measures which this Government has used to manage the coronavirus," banker Jose Flores said. "They need to test everybody so healthy people can get back to work and we can restart the economy," said a man who gave his name only as Carlos. "The worst virus is going to be the virus of Pedro and Pablo, who are going to ruin 47 million Spaniards," he said, referring to Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez and Deputy Prime Minister Pablo Iglesias. Similar protests took place in Zaragoza and the southern city of Seville, until recently a Socialist party stronghold. "It doesn't matter what the demonstrations are about. The important thing is to maintain social distancing," Mr Sanchez said. Silent protest held in ItalyIn Italy, members of the Italian Hospitality Network held spontaneous protests in several cities amid concerns that restrictions would negatively affect their income. Hospitality workers in Rome protested in front of the Pantheon, wearing their uniforms with a mourning armband while they stood in silence for several minutes. Restaurant managers and owners are worried that the safety measures they will have to adopt will not allow them to work properly and could result in financial losses for the business, as well as the income of their employees.
Coronavirus pushing bowls clubs into a major rethink
Well before coronavirus sent Australia into lockdown, bowls was facing dark times. Key points:The CEO of Bowls Australia said many clubs have suffered significant financial lossInternational representative Kristina Krstic says now would be a great opportunity to bring young people to the sportThe sport has made a push to increase membership, which has dwindled in recent yearsA decline in membership and revenue across the board for a decade had resulted in dozens of clubs folding in Australia's largest citiesIn 2019, several clubs in Brisbane and Sydney were forced to close their doors, struggling to compete with not only other sports but pubs and restaurants as well. The nationwide shutdown has only added to the headache of many clubs across the country. With many clubs slowly opening up their rinks, the long road back to financial stability for most clubs really begins. "Bowls Australia have recently undertaken a national survey of clubs and from the results, many clubs have clearly suffered significant financial losses which will necessitate a long period of recovery for many," Bowls Australia CEO Neil Dalrymple said. "It will take some time for bowls in Australia to recover but we remain optimistic that the sport and the 1,832 clubs across Australia will play a major role in reconnecting Australians on the other side of this pandemic."Despite the optimism, bowls has struggled for many years. The closure of Waverton North Sydney, as well as Toowong in Brisbane, cast a dark shadow over the future of the sport. The added pressure of coronavirus has left the top brass of the sport under no illusions. "The disappearance of any bowls clubs would be detrimental to those communities not only from a physical health perspective, but just as importantly, from a mental health and social consecutiveness perspective," Mr Dalrymple told ABC News. "Bowls Australia and our State and Territory Associations will be doing everything within our power to avoid the closing of any Bowls Clubs as a result of this pandemic."Bowls in search of the fountain of youthBowls clubs have struggled greatly in recent years. An injection of youth and a great presence in the community have been touted as key objectives to help revive the sport and its clubs. "Bowls Australia certainly isn't advocating for dramatic or drastic changes," Mr Dalrymple said. "But it is a great opportunity for clubs to attract new and younger members to their boards and committees to provide new innovative ideas to help grow clubs. "Now is a great time for clubs to try and increase our market share over the more dominating junior sports including netball, basketball, tennis and soccer."Emphasising the lack of contact in lawn bowls could be a major boost for the sport, according to one of the country's finest bowlers. Kristina Krstic is one of the younger members of the Australian international side and wants her sport to take advantage of the coronavirus shutdown. The 26-year-old from Western Australia has represented her country since she was 21 and sees an opportunity for a swarm of younger players to take up the game. "Placing emphasis on bowls being a "non-contact" sport may attract many families who may be hesitant to go back to contact sports," she said. "Kids have been missing out on the sporting aspects of their lives for almost a couple of months now so they may be interested in trying bowls while they aren't able to return to their usual sports."Preparations already underway across the boardMeasures to prepare sport and bowls clubs for the future were being prepared before the global health crisis. Deals with pay-television provider Foxtel, as well as coverage on SBS and Chanel 7 affiliate 7plus, was a step in the right direction, according to Ms Krstic. "I would definitely like to see this kind of exposure through media channels grow," she said. "Bowls' publicity on these channels is extremely important in regards to putting the sport out there and encouraging young people to take the sport up."But it is the measures at the local level which Mr Dalrymple told ABC were hoped to build clubs in their own communities. A marketing campaign launched in 2019 aimed at people aged between 30-50 is one of the newest measures to encourage new players to try the sport. "The campaign is reaching out to those looking for a team sport that's not inherently physically demanding in comparison to sports such as football and netball," he said. "Our campaign (named Local Legends Wanted) will be aired nationally in the coming months to help relaunch and reinvigorate bowls in Australia."Passion for the support needs to shine throughMs Krstic said the road back for bowls was going to be tough. "It's obviously a very difficult time for bowls clubs at the moment due to the loss of wages in response to COVID-19," she said. But a passionate base of players at clubs across the country will allow the sport to grow once rinks open up, according to Ms Krstic. "There are many existing members itching to get back to playing bowls which will help our bowls clubs grow when restrictions are relaxed," she said. "This moment in time could be a good opportunity for bowls clubs to "restart" and "rejuvenate", potentially by introducing bowls being played all year round"
The coronavirus new normal facing Australians in a world still gripped by pandemic
While Australia received its first major reprieve from COVID-19 restrictions this weekend, our lives are still a long way from what we once called normal. Key points:A Brisbane gym is enacting strict social distancing measuresMost pools are likely to remain closed as it's too costly to reopenCity eateries are reconfiguring their dining spaces to low patronageIndividuals and businesses have been forced to adapt, painting a stark picture of what life might be like in the post-pandemic world. If you are someone who sets your alarm early to exercise — even when gyms can open their doors — don't expect your workout experience to be the same as it was prior to COVID-19. Outdoor bootcamps are allowing personal trainers to keep their businesses alive for now, but gym owners are planning for the next phase. Joanne Johnson, who manages CrossFit Neuro in Brisbane, has already taped off areas to ensure her members are socially distant at all times. "Just going to know what their perimeter is to work out in a safe environment," Ms Johnson said. CrossFit Neuro is prepared to cap numbers of staff and members inside the gym. Athletes will soon have to sign into an allocated timeslot. "We won't be sharing really anything in the gym. Equipment will be allocated to a designated area that will be cleaned before and after," she said. Her members will also have their own cleaning equipment in their designated workout space. Booking systems will also help with contact tracing later down the track, should that ever be required. What about doing laps at the local pool?Many operators have admitted it's too costly to keep their facilities COVID-safe while they're restricted to allowing just 10 people in a pool at a time. Paying staff and extra cleaners, as well as heating costs, meant it was not viable for many local pools to reopen until restrictions are lifted further. Brisbane City Council said all 22 of its pools would remain closed "until further notice". A big hit is coming for investors as an end to interest-only home loans combines with coronavirus, experts warnLakes and lagoons are potentially the best option for the time being and SEQWater's Mike Foster said all its facilities were "very much back and open for business". He said policing social distancing would be an added responsibility for staff and park rangers for the foreseeable future. "In many ways we're asking the community to really manage themselves and self-police themselves," Mr Foster said. "It all makes common sense, we know if we do it, it gives us our best protection so there's plenty of ways to continue to enjoy the wonderful outdoors."It's business 'unusual' in the workplaceThe Commonwealth Bank is one major corporation that has kept about 80 per cent of its office staff working from home during COVID-19. That equates to about 20,000 people who will now begin a phased approach to returning to their offices. Those who are already working at the office are temperature-checked upon arrival. The bank has also been operating split teams that rotate between home and office since the pandemic began. Westpac has about 22,000 employees working from home. "Westpac is planning a phased approach for how employees can return to office locations safely over the coming weeks and months," a spokesperson told the ABC. Follow the red arrowed roadTica Hessing is a human geographer and tenant adviser at Cushman & Wakefield, based in Sydney. The commercial real estate company has developed a concept called the "Six Feet Office" and has spent the past week remodelling it. The space includes stickers on the floor indicating a 1.5-metre distance from desks and cubicles. There are even red arrows to encourage staff to move around the office in a clockwise direction, to help people avoid bumping into one another. "It's not only about the physical workplace, but it also helps with changing the behaviour of people in the workplace," Ms Hessing said. The office innovations were the brainchild of their colleagues in the Netherlands and were put into action to ensure more staff could safely work in close proximity. "We have the sneeze guards in place so that people can actually sit opposite each other," Ms Hessing said. How about lunch with a colleague?Before coronavirus, Perth's Yagan Square was a mecca for business workers at lunchtime. Shy John Brewery & Yum Cha has been closed since March, but is reopening with a hostess who will advise patrons about the restaurant's strict new protocols before they dine in. The venue can hold up to 300 people, but the biggest change is restricting patronage to no more than 20 guests at a time. General manager Justin Lim said they had redesigned the layout to ensure social distancing between guests and staff for the foreseeable future. "But it'll be up to our team, predominantly our host and the managers on duty together, to make sure that we work in line with those guidelines as well," he said. Mr Lim said guests would also be temperature-checked and that returning workers would notice big changes to the restaurant's operation. "The scheduling side of things, the kitchen operation, our menu, has to be minimised to be able to make it work, otherwise it's just not going to be cost-effective," he said. Kuan Sub Lee, who owns the Gangnam restaurant nearby, said the new restrictions, while far from business as usual, were a necessity. "I was building my customers and I feel like I have to do it again," he said. The 'new norm' for the 'foreseeable future'Michael Kidd from the Federal Government team assisting with the COVID-19 response said while a roadmap to recovery had been provided, it would be up to individual businesses to make their own plans for the months ahead. "Each business will need to look at what they're doing and look at the guidance which is being provided and then decide how does that apply to our business," Professor Kidd said. "Where people are coming into work [it's about] making sure that not everyone is coming in at the same time, so that we don't have crowding in the areas where people come in and out of the business."Staggered starts and flexible working arrangements have been recommended, as well as continuing to have staff work remotely where possible. "It will be for the foreseeable future because we don't know how long we're going to be living with COVID-19 in Australia," he said. "So, the measures that are put in place now are probably going to be measures which we need to continue to follow for many, many months."
Staff, residents in the clear at Rockhampton aged care home where nurse tested positive to coronavirus
More than 200 staff and residents at an aged care home have tested negative for coronavirus after a nurse earlier tested positive, sparking a COVID-19 emergency at the Rockhampton facility. Key points:Staff and residents at the North Rockhampton Nursing Centre have tested negative to coronavirusThe circumstances prior to a nurse testing positive are under investigationThe daughter of one resident says she heard about the nurse testing positive in the mediaQueensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said 235 people at the facility had tested negative, with another 37 results to do. Earlier, 35 residents from the North Rockhampton Nursing Centre had been relocated to the Mater and Hillcrest private hospitals as testing got underway. Plans to move the elderly residents were announced by Deputy Premier and Health Minister Steven Miles after an Enrolled Nurse at the facility tested positive for COVID-19 on Thursday night, more than 10 days after she is believed to have become contagious. The home was placed into lockdown. The incident sparked fears of a repeat of Newmarch House, the Sydney coronavirus cluster that has seen the deaths of 16 aged residents and 69 infections. In a statement, Queensland Health said moving the residents would ensure those who may have been in contact with the infected staff member could be appropriately isolated for the required isolation period. Nurse went to work after being testedThe nurse, who is understood to have been working at a reception desk and not in direct contact with residents while she had symptoms, is now in isolation. The Central Queensland Hospital and Health Service says the circumstances prior to the positive diagnosis are under investigation because she was onsite after being symptomatic and after being sent for testing. How the nurse became infected is still unknown, but tracing is underway to track her movements after a trip to Brisbane before she became sick. Queensland Chief Health Officer Jeannette Young said the nurse had an "essential purpose" to travel to Brisbane but she had been left "speechless" that some people were still not following warnings to say at home while unwell. "She wasn't providing hands-on care to the residents which is a good thing, but she did have contact with people which is why we're being extremely cautious."Dr Young urged all residents in Rockhampton who had "any symptoms" to step forward to be tested and said a second fever clinic would be opened in the central Queensland town today. She said the nurse had been out in the community during that time and it was impossible to trace everyone. Meanwhile, a new fever clinic at the CQ University, north of Rockhampton, will be open from 9am-4pm seven days a week to help cope with more requests for testing. Resident's daughter heard news on TVThe daughter of one 95-year-old resident at the Rockhampton aged care home said she found out about the health scare from a TV news report. Cathy Garvie's 95-year-old mum, Beryl Goddy, lives in the Ivy Baker Ward at the North Rockhampton Nursing Centre, which is the wing at the focus of the scare. "I was watching ABC 24 News and I saw it come up there," she said. "I think they [the centre] had lots more things to think about than worrying about us. They had the patients to think about and everything."Ms Garvie said she had visited her mum on Thursday, the day the nurse was diagnosed. "You had to buzz to be let in and then they listed all the symptoms, 'did you have all these?', and then they took our temperature," she said. "I've always taken all precautions with it. I always wear a hand-made mask when I visit the unit and I clean my hands as I go in and I clean mum's as we go [outside]."Ms Garvie is now in isolation waiting for her own coronavirus test results. "I feel well and my temperature has been 35 for the last few tests I've had over the last couple of weeks," she said. "I have every confidence in the staff there, so I haven't really been that worried. "I've rung them up and wished them all the best and got updates on how everything is going."What are the state guidelines?Jeanette Young issued an aged care direction as a result of the coronavirus public health emergency. Anyone visiting a Queensland aged care facility must have an up-to-date influenza vaccinationUp to two people can visit for a maximum of two hours on a particular dayAnyone providing essential goods, health, medical or pharmaceutical services can enterVisitors are permitted for end-of-life supportAnyone who has returned from overseas in the past 14 days, had contact with a confirmed case, or has any symptoms cannot visitChildren under 16 cannot visit unless it is for end-of-life support
India's coronavirus lockdown: The good, the bad and the ugly of Narendra Modi's COVID-19 measures
India is in no man's land. Thousands of confirmed COVID-19 cases are being added every day to the national tally, but it's not enough to guarantee disaster is on the horizon. Around a third of all coronavirus cases have recovered and the death rate is relatively low, but victory is not yet in sight. Health experts have continued to say just a few more days of lockdown would give a clearer picture of where the country is headed, but after more than six weeks there's still no answer. India has now surged past 90,000 confirmed cases and is recording more than 4,000 new cases a day. It has also passed China's tally. And yet the country, groaning under huge internal economic and social pressure, is easing restrictions to get the economy moving again. Interstate trains are resuming operations to get poor migrant workers back home, posing a real risk of spreading the coronavirus to rural areas where medical services are poorest. So how did it get here? And why, after six weeks of one of the world's strictest lockdowns, is the country still in such an uncertain position? Here's what we know. The Good: Early lockdown measuresSix weeks ago, I wrote that India was doing relatively OK, especially compared to Australia. I made the assessment not only because the number of confirmed cases was low, but because India was acting in an assertive and confident manner that appeared to be lacking in the west. Australia was in the midst of a panic buying frenzy as numbers jumped, and policy-makers were flipflopping about mass gatherings — such as Formula One or rugby league — while India was shutting down borders, schools, cricket matches, and even Bollywood, in what seemed to be a methodical fashion. Then India imposed one of the world's strictest lockdowns, when confirmed cases of the coronavirus had just passed 500. Almost everything, except essential services and businesses that related to food or medicine, was shut, causing a sudden shift in community sentiment — as if confirmed cases had shot up. But along with some unease, there was also a sense of national pride. India, it seemed, was tackling the issue head on. "India started off reasonably well," said the Public Health Foundation of India's Professor K Shrinath Reddy. "India did take several measures that were fairly effective and ahead of many of the western countries."According to researchers at Oxford University, who have rated the strength of lockdowns across the world from zero to 100 using a "stringency index", India's lockdown scored the highest rating of 100. In comparison Australia — which at the time had four times the confirmed cases — scored 63. And even when Australia had the same number of cases as India, its lockdown measures scored 34. "There was a great sense of vulnerability, because of the large population and the overcrowded slums and cities," Professor Reddy said. "As well as the relatively weak health system, and the frightening images of overwhelmed health systems and hospitals coming in from Europe and North America. "That led to the decision that we must have a lockdown, and there was not much resistance to the lockdown from the general public."The Good: Extraordinary humane social responseIndia's measures suppressed the curve and hospitals have not been inundated as many had feared, although experts have suggested the country's young demographic is likely to have helped the latter. "If you look at deaths per million, we are way, way low down," Professor Reddy said. "1.27 deaths per million population compared to 700 plus in Belgium and more than 200 in Europe, and close to 200 in the US."Many of India's cases are concentrated in a few metropolitan areas and hotspot clusters, which have been quarantined, while more than 40 per cent of India's regional and municipal districts — accounting for a quarter of the population — have been labelled "green zones". This means they have not had a confirmed case of the coronavirus for at least 21 days. The southern state of Kerala, a region renowned for quality health care and high literacy rates, was the first state to register cases of COVID-19 and of the more than 500 confirmed cases its had since, only about 30 are still active. It has become the envy of India after it responded to initial cases with rapid testing, contact-tracing, clear communication to combat false rumours, and even home delivered meals for school children stuck at home. But according to Professor Reddy, the situation across India can't be characterised in a "unitary fashion". "The southern states, especially Kerala, had an extraordinarily efficient public health response, as well as a humane social response," he said. The Bad: Not enough testing and 'PPE not being available to everyone'While India's aggressive lockdown and social distancing measures were praised by the World Health Organization, the country's initial response was lacking in another crucial area: testing. Its testing regime focused on those with symptoms who had been contact with a confirmed case, or who had travelled to a hotspot country, but it's now evident asymptomatic cases were slipping through the country's defences. "No lockdown can be 100 per cent foolproof," renowned public health expert Anant Bhan said. "People were allowed to go out and get milk, to get groceries, to buy vegetables and there were cases, for example, where that was the source of infection [or] sometimes it was through delivery of food, like pizza delivery."Home to more than 1.3 billion people, India's testing regime per capita was always likely to rate low — although it has increased the number of daily tests from around 5,000 in late March to just under 100,000. The country appears to now be paying the price for its slow start. "We never really knew how much it had spread in the community prior to the lockdown and during the lockdown," Dr Bhan said. "A lot of police and health care workers got infected because the infected ended up being asymptomatic as well."The state of Maharastra and particularly its capital Mumbai, the country's financial and entertainment capital, has been the hardest hit, accounting for a third of all coronavirus cases. Hundreds of neighbourhoods in Mumbai have been turned into containment zones, where residents cannot leave. More than a 1,000 cases have been recorded in Asia’s largest slum, Dharavi, where social distancing is near impossible to maintain. Hospitals last week ran out of beds for critically ill patients , and at least 15 hospitals have been partially or fully placed into quarantine, after doctors and nurses became infected. According to Dr Bahn, there were a few reasons behind this, including "poor quality personal protective equipment or PPE not being available to everyone". "Bhilwara is a city in southern Rajasthan where the infection spread was traced to a hospital, a very busy hospital," Dr Bhan said. "Probably, a patient came in and infected the [health care] providers, and they ended up spreading it to patients."The Ugly: Millions of migrant workers left without an incomeWhen India's lockdown was announced, Prime Minister Narendra Modi gave just four hours' notice, leaving millions of migrant workers who live hand-to-mouth without an income or a bed as factories and construction sites closed down. Lines of young men desperately trying to walk hundreds of kilometres to their home town or village, without food or water, became a common sight in Delhi and other cities during the early days of the lockdown, while those left behind were turned into beggars. "It's worse than I ever imagined," journalist Saba Naqvi said. "They were proud people. Many of these people work with their hands — they have been reduced to a condition where they have to beg for food."It prompted Mr Modi to apologise to the poor for causing "immense suffering" and the Government to announce huge relief packages and set up quarantined accommodation for migrant workers. But it remained on the backfoot. At least 47 people have died due to starvation, 26 to exhaustion, and 83 to suicide due to lockdown hardship, according to a study by a group of academics and activists. Last week, 16 migrant workers were crushed to death after falling asleep on train tracks as they tried to get home. Many have defended the Government's snap decision to impose a lockdown, saying migrant workers would have exited cities en masse anyway, elevating the risk of the virus spreading. But Professor Reddy is doubtful. "The migrants, because of the nature of their occupations and the places of their stay, would have had very little exposure to the virus," he said. "They could have been assisted in returning home."The Ugly: A mass event and Islamophobic fake newsThe ferocity of the coronavirus's ability to spread became clear after an outbreak at a congregation of supporters of the Sunni Islamic movement, Tablighi Jamaat, in defiance of the city's restrictions on mass gatherings. It prompted anger to again start mounting towards Muslims, just weeks after deadly violence erupted between Muslims and Hindu nationalists in the nation's capital. Islamophobic rumours started taking off on social media, and Muslim workers and street vendors were being chastised. "When the event broke out, we immediately knew what was to follow," said journalist Archis Chowdhury, who authored a study on fake news for factcheck website Boom Live. "We were doing one fact check every day about a rumour that was targeting Muslims with false allegations of spreading coronavirus purposefully."Chowdhury said a video showing a couple of Muslim youths licking plates "went viral [falsely claiming] Muslims are spreading their spit and the coronavirus with it". "It's a very old video from 2018 and it's of the Dawoodi Bohra community, who have this practice of licking their plates clean to avoid wastage of food," he said. So what's next for India?India may be at a crucial turning point, but it will have to make many more manoeuvrers in coming weeks and months. "It is absolutely improper to start marking [how India is going] at this stage," Professor Reddy said. "We've seen how South Korea has had a setback; we've seen how Singapore has had a setback. "We have to mark stage by stage and start learning. How fast a learner you are, and how fast you apply those learnings, is going to be important. "Now comes the big challenge."
Coronavirus and social distancing have changed my relationships — how can I make it permanent?
A few weeks ago, at the end of a video call with a friend who works at Tamworth Hospital, we were saying our goodbyes and I told him: "I love you". This expression of tenderness was not a first for our friendship, however, the manner in which it was received — earnestly reciprocated and not deflected with a joke or a melodramatic reply — was. This sincere desire for closeness has manifested itself again and again in conversations with the men in my life, leading me to me hope that perhaps one of the unintended positive consequences of the COVID-19 crisis is that it may help us redraw the socially acceptable limits of masculinity. To say that this new-found sensitivity has taken me by surprise would be an understatement. Australian masculinity is kind of like a VB ad: there are almost imperceptible changes over time, but the underlying theme remains the same. You need only look to the archetypes of our national identity — the swagman, the ANZAC, the battler, Ned Kelly, Crocodile Dundee — to see that we have historically defined ourselves through a lens of rugged, stoic masculinity in which men avoid overt displays of emotion lest it undermine their self-image of toughness and laid-back larrikinism. But what if the pandemic is an opportunity for Australians to rethink our rigid ideas of what it means to be a man — for the better?A more caring way of being a manThe crisis has forced us to collectively re-evaluate fundamental aspects not just of our own lives but society as a whole. The social isolation we're experiencing has made many of us grapple with our interconnectedness and, in particular, how to maintain social bonds while we're physically apart. The lingering spectre of death and disease is a constant reminder of the things we can no longer take for granted, including our loved ones. With these uplifting thoughts in mind, in late March I resolved to start telling the people I care about how much they mean to me, and one major change I've noticed is that the men in my life are suddenly more willing to open up about their feelings and be vulnerable in a way they previously wouldn't have. And, it turns out, I might not be the only one. "There has been a trend [among men] towards more openness and authentic models of friendship in recent years, where genuine trust and closeness are valued," says Associate Professor Steven Roberts, who studies men and masculinity at Monash University. "The lockdown offers the possibility for an expansion of these behaviours."Men whose idea of maintaining friendship previously extended as far as texting "Pub tonight?" every few months are suddenly teeing up virtual coffee dates weeks in advance to candidly discuss their mental health. Social isolation, says Roberts, "is forcing us all to confront our need for intimacy, it's making clear we are all vulnerable."That's not to say this disruption will result only in positive changes. According to Associate Professor Michael Flood, who researches men, masculinities and violence prevention at Queensland University of Technology, crises such as pandemics can completely upend traditional gender roles. For example, the HIV-AIDS crisis in Africa "took such a profound toll that it interrupted many men's ability to be the breadwinners," Flood says, "either because economies collapsed or because of other rapid economic changes". As conventionally "masculine" norms became harder to embody, he says, "some men responded to the loss of that traditional male power through backlash. That is, there were increases in domestic and sexual violence against women."While we don't yet know exactly how the COVID-19 pandemic will affect the rate and severity of violence in Australia, some frontline workers are already reporting an increase in requests for help from victims of domestic violence. And a UN Women report published last month found that violence against women has intensified around the world since the outbreak of COVID-19. However, the potential for an increase in men's violence as a result of factors like economic upheaval and unemployment is by no means guaranteed, which is why a re-evaluation of what it means to be a man in our society is so necessary. Flood says there has been much greater community awareness and discussion about the "value of care and care work" in recent weeks. This "greater valuing of human mutuality, interdependence and community as key means of surviving ... and supporting each other through this pandemic", he says, has the potential to change our conception of manhood. For example, while women are still shouldering the majority of caring responsibilities, the Workplace Gender Equality Agency has found men are taking on more care and domestic work as a result of flexible working arrangements necessitated by the COVID-19 crisis. This slight redistribution of domestic labour represents an opportunity to value a new, more caring way of being a man. According to Roberts though, some pockets of society seem to have reverted to "old social norms". "Some have called this the return of the 1950s housewife, with women undertaking the large bulk of domestic duties and caring responsibilities, including home schooling," he says. What might a new, modern masculinity look like?Even if lockdown does lead to positive changes to gender roles, is it possible to maintain them post-pandemic? And if so, what might a new, modern masculinity look like?"There are opportunities [for men] to develop deep and profound empathy in this current crisis ... but whether we can sustain it is unclear," says Roberts. "One thing we can do as individuals and as a society is more overtly celebrate deviations from traditional masculine norms."Whether that's opening up about our feelings, prioritising a healthier work-life balance, or initiating housework without expecting praise, there are numerous ways men can start redefining masculinity for themselves. "A big difference is having a personal experience of a different life, a different way of living," says Flood — which is exactly what COVID-19 has given many of us. My personal experience is that there is a genuine desire among men to forge a more caring conception of masculinity. In the past two months I've seen previously stoic men break down over their anxieties about what the future holds. I've listened to them intently describe their newly discovered closeness with their children and disclose that, when this is all over, they don't want to go back to the way things were. There is a profound relief to be found in no longer trying to embody an unattainable idea of manliness, in loving and allowing yourself to be loved, in admitting that everything's not alright at a time when it so obviously isn't. Letting people know how you feel, asking for help when you need it — being vulnerable — isn't weakness, it requires strength. Which is why I'm vowing to keep telling the men in my life that I love them, and I encourage others to do the same, not just for our own sake but for that of the people around us. Because we can get it Skypin', we can get it typin', we can get it callin' our mates, a new-found masculinity needs a big old crisis and the best old crisis is COVID. COVID-19. We can get it carin', we can get it sharin', we can get it makin' a vow, matter of fact I've got it now.
Cruise ship coronavirus outbreaks have forced the industry to make drastic changes
Cruise ships have been linked to hundreds of cases of coronavirus across the country, but some Australians are keen to get back on board as soon as possible. Key points:Temperature checks and fewer passengers could be part of the changesSome companies are offering tickets on cruises for SeptemberTourism Minister says there are no guarantees when cruising will be allowed to resumeHowever, a holiday on the high seas will look drastically different when ships are allowed to again set sail. The industry is working on new health protocols that could include temperature testing and a reduction in the number of passengers allowed onboard. Cruise Lines International Association represents the major cruise companies and its Australasia managing director, Joel Katz, said the industry was figuring out how to operate in a world with no COVID-19 vaccine. "This virus really thrives in social situations — there is nothing more social than a cruise," he said. Changes to every aspect of cruising are currently being considered in an attempt to convince governments it could start up again in a way that would not lead to hundreds of infections. Mr Katz conceded there was no quick fix and all options were on the table. "[That includes] the health questionnaires that [passengers] will be required to fill in, the screening, testing, every aspect of the onboard operation including the onboard medical capabilities all the way through to when the guest gets home," he said. Changes to how guests interact are also being examined and could include reducing the number of passengers allowed in theatres and offering more meal sitting times so tables and chairs can be better spaced. Cruising this year? Depends who you askThe industry was shut down as coronavirus spread across the world, with high levels of infections connected to ships that docked on the east and west coast of Australia. Just months later, some operators are planning on setting sail in September and are offering special deals to lure customers. But Deputy Chief Medical Officer Nick Coatsworth has made it clear Australians should not be booking such a holiday yet. "There will be an opportunity and time to consider whether cruise ships are the right place to go, but I would suggest it is too early at this point in time," he said. That medical advice is not deterring Australians, though, with many booking tickets for travel in coming months. Kathy Pavlidis manages Travel Associates in Kew, Victoria, and said customers loyal to particular cruise lines were already planning international trips. "I've had five bookings just this week and they can't wait to get back on board," she said. Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham urged Australians not to book holidays that are currently banned. "There are no guarantees about when any of the activities will restart," he told the ABC. "Certainly no guarantees about international travel and definitely no guarantees about international cruise shipping."Tourism during uncertain timesCruises are just one part of Australia's tourism industry, which is in the process of developing new rules for operators to follow while COVID-19 remains a threat. Tourism and Transport Forum chief executive officer Margy Osmond said it was about providing clarity during uncertain times. "Everything from what social distancing looks like on a tour bus, what are the sort of provisions you need to put in place in a theatre or art gallery, potentially what it looks like when people go camping again," she said. "Over the next few weeks you will see some more standard views from across the industry about what's thought to be the baseline. "We hope that will make governments and consumers feel more confident about all of their travel options."Ms Osmond said COVID-19 provided an opportunity for tourist operators to think outside the box and suggested the cruise industry could offer more trips within Australian waters if health authorities approved the move. "Once the state borders open it's not impossible that we will start seeing cruise options around Australia in the last quarter of this year," she said. Mr Katz said cruise operators will consider putting on more local trips while international travel remains banned for Australians. "I would expect we will see more domestic or possible regional itinerary options in that initial start up phase," he said. But do not expect the Tourism Minister to get behind the idea. Senator Birmingham said he would rather people stay onshore. "The most important focus of our tourism recovery will be on attracting visitors to stay in our towns, supporting Australian businesses to get back on their feet," he said. "I will be urging them [Australians] to firstly get in their cars and drive across regional Australia wherever they can and when we get to point state borders are opened, to hopefully get on planes and head to some of the other great destinations around the country."
Coronavirus lockdown helps keep space in ICU for chronically ill people like me
I know many of you are finding lockdown challenging: negotiating appropriate backgrounds for Zoom meetings, supervising kids' lessons, baking up a storm. Like you, we are missing time with family and friends. But we have something extra to contend with. In January 2013, when I was 43 and our daughter Kimi was six, I received the shocking diagnosis of motor neurone disease (MND). I was a seemingly healthy academic, a swimmer and runner, an active parent and partner, a hugging friend. Now, my body is completely paralysed, except for my face. A ventilator pushes air in and out of a tube in my neck to keep me alive. I cannot speak. I communicate with a NeuroNode strapped to my wrist, cleverly transmitting my tiny muscle twitches as signals to my phone. On the plus side this means I am not at risk of touching my face with corona-coated fingers. But it also means that my family and I are more vulnerable than most to COVID-19, and not just because of my weakened body's inherent susceptibility. We are more vulnerable because I am dependent on a team of carers to do everything for me — from hoisting me out of bed to wiping my eyes (and arse), from feeding me lunch to suctioning my airway clear, from keeping my machines running to repositioning sore joints at 3:00am. It's impossible to be isolated with this team of nine carers who work shifts in our home, or to keep two metres away from the people who are washing my "charm"-pits or tipping condensation from the tube that pushes air in and out of my lungs. The absence of paid sick leave that is a shitty fact of life for casual workers becomes a dangerous disincentive to staying away and waiting to be tested if they develop symptoms. And it's best not to contemplate what would happen if infection of a team member or their contact necessitated all of us quarantining. I have learnt to appreciate the 'gift of life'Like others in the MND community I am particularly grateful for the work Australians have done in flattening the curve. I want ICU beds to be available not only for the people with COVID-19 who need them, but for others needing hospital care to give them a shot at staying alive. I have been one of those people several times in my seven years with MND, sometimes with a little notice, such as when I had a supra pubic catheter inserted just before I lost the capacity to stand up from the loo, even with (generous) help; more often catapulted in by a respiratory crisis. My most recent ICU "holiday" started with losing six hours to near-fatal carbon dioxide narcosis, continued with a life-saving tracheotomy and laryngectomy, and finished with a long, slow period of recruiting and training carers. That nine-and-a-half months in ICU, along with my years living with MND, have turned out to be good preparation for the current restrictions. I have learnt to appreciate the gift of life, to find pleasure in small things, to accept the derailment of plans, to adapt, to live in the present, to be grateful for (immense) kindness, to connect with others online, to cope with loss of control, to try to make the most of each day, to forgive myself when I stuff up, to welcome help, to laugh, to manage confinement (in my hospital bed, my immobile body), to trust, to view modest outings as a treat, to enjoy the life of the mind, to know how wonderful it is to be home with my beautiful, beloved family. Spare a thought for those just diagnosedThis month we celebrate MND week. Normally we gather, a community united in hope and remembrance. We participate in MND awareness campaigns and fundraising walks; we sell and wear cornflowers. This year, there are virtual gatherings and events, such as Cornflower Blue Day and Australia Moves 4 MND. I am lucky that this is my eighth MND week since my diagnosis. Typically people live two or three years, many for less. My heart goes out to those dealing with recent MND diagnosis — a mortality rate of 100 per cent, not one or two per cent — in this time of isolation. Please spare a thought for those trying to process this devastating news now, having only the screen version of health professionals like my fabulous neurologist, Professor Dominic Rowe. They are having to forgo closeness and hugs when they are most needed, and missing out on what might be their last opportunities to swim or work or go to the pub or attend family weddings or travel, making memories for their kids in the shadow of what will become our global collective memory. They're also unable to meet face-to-face with other people with MND or MND association advisers, contemplating death at a time when the number of mourners allowed at funerals is limited. Thank youAs a potential beneficiary, I say a heartfelt 'thank you' to everyone making sacrifices to flatten the curve. Thank you to our political leaders working together to make difficult decisions. Thank you to our dedicated healthcare workers for doing what you can to minimise mortality: I hope you can stay safe. Thank you to health communicators and broadcasters for keeping us informed. Thanks to essential workers for providing care, teaching, producing food, making masks, delivering pizza, researching, selling toilet paper, troubleshooting technology, first-responding, collecting garbage and more. Thank you to those who are finding themselves or their businesses reliant on or ineligible for welfare: I sincerely hope our taxes are raised and our safety net is widened and permanently strengthened. Thank you to comedians, musicians, dancers, writers and actors for spreading joy. And a huge thank you to everyone who's being kind to those around them, washing their hands and keeping their distance.
Relaxation of coronavirus restrictions at SA restaurants and pubs brought forward
Alcohol will be back on the menu at South Australian restaurants and cafes from Friday, as the State Government brings forward the relaxation of some coronavirus restrictions. The change will see restaurants will be able to seat up to 20 patrons — 10 indoor and 10 outdoor. South Australia's previous restriction roadmap contemplated restaurants only allowing 10 outdoor diners, with no alcohol until June 8. Now, pubs and clubs will be permitted to open on June 5, the Saturday of the Queen's Birthday long weekend. South Australia has had just one case of coronavirus detected in the past 28 days.
Coronavirus shutdown could be responsible for decrease in sexually transmitted infection rates in the ACT
No parties, no pubs, no smooching with a stranger and definitely no one night stands. COVID-19 has undoubtedly had a huge impact on the sex lives of Australians. But while the world has been consumed with the trajectory of one kind of virus, some sexual health clinicians are quietly pleased with the mellowing out of another. In the ACT, there was a 52 per cent reduction in the number of people testing positive to gonorrhoea in April, compared to the average of the past five years. And, following a national trend, there was a 34 per cent decrease in the recorded cases of chlamydia. Although we do not have a full picture of the data yet, experts say the pandemic could be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to drive down the rates of sexually transmitted infections (STIs). "Nationally, that data won't be available for quite some time," Canberra Sexual Health Centre director Sarah Martin said. "But we've all worked very hard to reduce the spread of COVID-19. And for some people, this might also have meant less partying with casual sex, less chance of infection. "I think we've had an opportunity to slow down."Dr Martin's clinic, along with many others, have changed the way they do regular sexual health check-ups during COVID-19. Patients have been asked to phone ahead for an initial assessment, and only those considered high risk have had face-to-face appointments. That might be skewing the data — with fewer people to test, the lab could be returning different results. But Dr Martin said it was likely at least some of the reduction in cases was because of what was effectively an enforced period of celibacy. Now is the chance to break the chain of infectionDr Martin said she was aware that a lot of people were keen to get their sex lives back on track once coronavirus restrictions eased further. That is why she is urging people to get their STI tests now, even if they have no symptoms. "Some people might not feel they need testing now. Others might have decided to delay testing for a while. And others again, might have found it more difficult to access testing than usual," Dr Martin said. "[But] now it's an opportunity to think through how to stay safe."ACT Labor politician Tara Cheyne agreed with Dr Martin, and said getting tested was a no brainer. Last year Ms Cheyne told the ACT Legislative Assembly that she contracted chlamydia at age 21, in a speech calling for action to reduce the stigma around sexually transmitted diseases. "It was incredibly straightforward, it wasn't a big deal," Ms Cheyne said. "What would have been a big deal is if I didn't get tested and if I didn't get treated."Ms Cheyne also agreed that there is no better time to get tested than now. "I think there's probably something almost a little bit sexy in itself about being confident in your own mind and of your own health, that you are STI free," she added. "For many STIs the treatments are very simple. It can be as simple as taking one or two tablets and waiting a week."Dating could forever be differentThe return to what has been dubbed 'regency-era courtship' by those in the dating game has led to many a meme, and many first dates have been conducted via video chat during the coronavirus pandemic. Sexologist Kym Robinson said that, while she was not sure all her single clients had been following the strict physical distancing restrictions, she was hopeful the focus COVID-19 placed on infectious diseases would transfer to safe sex practices and prevention of STIs. "We're talking a lot more about social distancing and ways of protecting ourselves like hand washing. I'm hoping that people are going to put a little bit more thought into safer sex practices," Mrs Robinson said. "Perhaps I'm a little optimistic, but I'm hoping that's going to then transfer onto the STI rates."While it might be anxiety inducing to have safe-sex conversations with potential partners in a post-shutdown world, Mrs Robinson said it is better than the alternative. "If you don't get checked, those are actually more tricky conversations," she said. "Imagine how much more difficult it'll be later, when you say we need to use a condom because I have something that I don't want you to catch."
Victorian health officials access coronavirus patient's COVIDSafe app data for first time
Victorian health officials have accessed a coronavirus patient's COVIDSafe app data for the first time. Key points:Health officials on Monday identified that a Victorian who tested positive to coronavirus had downloaded and registered the appIt is the first time Victorian health authorities have made use of the app and the first publicly announced use of the app in AustraliaThe coronavirus patient gave consent for the data on the app to be downloadedThe Federal Government smartphone application records when users have been in proximity to other smartphones with the app to help authorities track down people who may have been exposed to the virus. A Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) spokesperson said a coronavirus positive patient who had the COVIDSafe app registered on their phone was identified on Monday. It is the first time Victorian health officials have been able to make use of the app. However, it is not known if other app users have been in the proximity of the user who contracted COVID-19. The Federal Health Department has refused to say whether the app had already been used elsewhere in the country however it was the first publicly announced use of the app. The DHHS spokesperson said the patient gave consent to health authorities to use the data on their phone, which was downloaded to look for potential contacts. "Access is strictly limited to trained public health officers carrying out contact tracing functions," the spokesperson said. "Victoria has legislated privacy obligations when handling citizens’ private data or health data and these obligations will be adhered to. "With only a small number of cases in Victoria, there have been few opportunities to use the app so far. "We hope this continues."How does the COVIDSafe app work?The COVIDSafe app relies on Bluetooth to detect other users of the app that are within range. When it detects another user, it exchanges an encrypted packet of information containing the name, age range, postcode, mobile number, date and time and Bluetooth signal strength of the contacts. That data is stored on a user's phone for up to 21 days. If a user tests positive for COVID-19, they can upload their stored contacts to a central repository held by the federal Health Department. That data is then made available to state health authorities for contact tracing.
Could Australia expand its proposed coronavirus travel bubble to the Pacific Islands? Here's what you need to know
In Fiji, pristine bungalows sit empty, sparkling resort pools have no-one swimming in them and thousands of employees who would usually be on hand to greet tourists with wide smiles have been left without work. While COVID-19 has shut down the Pacific Island country's biggest industry, Fiji hopes it won't be for too much longer. The Government wants to see Australian and New Zealand tourists return "as soon as possible" and is pushing hard to become part of the "travel bubble" the two countries are planning. So, when could Australians be back sunning themselves on a beach in Fiji, what are the risks and benefits of reopening borders in the region and what do other Pacific Island countries think of the "travel bubble" idea?Should I start saving for a ticket to Fiji?While discussions between Australia, New Zealand and Fiji are underway, there is still no timeframe on when travel to Fiji, or other pacific island countries, could resume. But Federal Liberal MP and co-convenor of the Parliamentary Friends of the Pacific Group Dave Sharma told the Lowy Institute we could see travel resume to some Pacific Island countries this year. "I'd be hesitant to put a timetable on it, but I expect towards the end of this year — 2020," he said,"I would think we should have some parameters in place that would be allowing us to commence this sort of thing and possibly even sooner."Australia and New Zealand have made it clear that re-establishing travel between themselves is their initial priority, and even that could be some months away. Once we have established travel arrangements across the Tasman, Prime Minister Scott Morrison has also said we will "explore opportunities to expand the concept to members of our broader Pacific family". But all countries are being very cautious in their approach — they want to be confident the risk of spreading COVID-19 from Australia and New Zealand into Pacific Island countries is mitigated, especially because they so far seem to have avoided the worst of coronavirus. The Fijian Government has formally requested to join the bubble and behind the scenes, the country is seen as a frontrunner among Pacific Island countries because of its interest, its tourism industry and its experience with COVID-19. However, Fiji's Attorney General Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum says "these decisions aren't made overnight". "We've obviously put our hand up, we want to look at how we can place ourselves in a more prime position," he said. How would the arrangement work?Australia's High Commissioner to Fiji, John Feakes, said the "hard work" in terms of creating travel arrangements will be hashed out by Australia and New Zealand in the initial stages of the bubble. "Once the work has been done to open up the Trans-Tasman bubble, we will look very quickly to include Fiji in that as well," he said. "But our principal concern is to make sure that the health of New Zealanders, Australians and Fijians is protected."Medical and health considerations will be at the forefront, but issues such as travel insurance, quarantine and testing measures and whether tourists are restricted to certain areas of countries, all need to be agreed upon. Australia and New Zealand have started an expert panel to look at protocols for Trans-Tasman travel and there have been some calls to include Pacific Island stakeholders in the discussions. What about concerns over spreading COVID-19?The ability to trace and respond to potential cases of COVID-19 will also be a consideration. Seemingly in response to this, Fiji is about to start a trial of its own version of the coronavirus tracing app. Mr Sayed-Khaiyum said the country is "feeling good" about how it has responded to the coronavirus, through contact-tracing and lockdowns. It has recorded 18 cases of COVID-19, but no new cases in the past four weeks. But its testing rate is still well below Australia and New Zealand, and there are some early concerns about how effective the app will be in the country. The numbers of COVID-19 cases have been equally steady in most Pacific Island countries, but there is a push to increase antibody testing in the region to ensure cases aren't being missed. Australia, New Zealand and the World Health Organisation are currently delivering almost 100 000 GeneXpert testing cartridges to Pacific Island countries. Pacific countries have experienced devastation from introduced diseases in the past, most recently when measles killed more than 80 people in Samoa. In the face of their vulnerabilities, most acted quickly to protect themselves from COVID-19 and they'll be careful not to jeopardise that now. What do other Pacific Island countries think of the 'travel bubble'?While Fiji has been the most forthcoming about wanting to be included in the "travel bubble," other countries across the region have had different reactions. Vanuatu has confirmed it has had talks with Australia about the idea. While its economy is also heavily reliant on tourism, it has been incredibly cautious about reopening its borders given it has not recorded any cases of COVID-19 so far. The Cook Islands, another tourism dependent economy, has expressed interest in reopening borders. Other Pacific Island countries that haven't recorded any cases, especially those with smaller tourism industries, have also expressed some hesitation. But a Pacific bubble is about more than just providing beaches for Australians and New Zealanders to sun themselves on. It could provide new trade opportunities in the region and reopen travel for Pacific workers who visit Australia and New Zealand under specific labour schemes. Papua New Guinea Prime Minister James Marape said he had held discussions with his Australian counterpart about the travel bubble between Australia and New Zealand. "We're sensitive to those discussions, but Mr Morrison has told me they kept Pacific Islands out of discussions simply because most have almost nil presence of COVID-19," he said. PNG's borders will remain closed until at least the start of June, but its national airline has continued flying to Australia throughout the lockdown period, to collect freight. Mr Marpae said he told Mr Morrison PNG is developing a "protocol on international travel". The Secretary General of the Pacific Islands Forums, Dame Meg Taylor, said several Pacific countries had approached New Zealand and Australia about being included in the bubble. She told an Asia Society Policy Institute event that while everyone wants to see things reopen, it will "take time" and the first priority "is that people stay healthy". "We just don't have strong health systems, health services and health infrastructure," Dame Meg said. "If you're going to open up, you've got to have some kind of security there so that anyone coming into your country, and your citizens as well, feel secure enough that they will be taken care of if there is a case that comes into the country."So why is Fiji so eager to join?Tourism is the country's biggest industry, bringing in about $1.37 billion ($2 billion Fijian) and accounting for 35 per cent of GDP, and Australians and New Zealanders account for about 75 per cent of Fiji's tourists. But no-one has been coming to the country since it closed its borders at the end of March, to protect against the coronavirus. As a result, as many as 100,000 people are thought to have lost work in Fiji and there are growing concerns about the wellbeing of workers who have been laid off. Tony Whitton — managing director of the Rosie Travel Group, which operates two resorts — said he had to stand down 600 workers without pay because the business has no income coming in. "It's been the most heartbreaking aspect of our business — our business has been in operation since 1974, this is the first time that we've had to initiate a furlough," he said. In the midst of the coronavirus lockdown, Fiji was also hit by Cyclone Harold, and the economic impact will likely see a recession, or possibly even a depression. Mr Whitton said the sooner tourists can safely start returning, the better. "The greatest aid that Australia and New Zealand can give us at this time is the tourism dollar," he said.
Coronavirus will alter our history — just like these epidemics and pandemics before it
It's still too early to know how profoundly coronavirus will change our societies, but it's clear we'll be living with the shockwaves for years to come. This pandemic will alter the course of history in ways we can't predict — just like those before it. Along with wars, economic changes and technological developments, outbreaks of infectious disease have radically shaped the world we live in today. Perhaps the most infamous is the bubonic plague, which ravaged Europe for centuries and resulted in the Black Death, the global pandemic that struck Europe and Asia in the mid-1300s. We've also heard a lot recently about the Spanish flu pandemic of 1918, which killed millions of people around the world. But lesser-known epidemics and pandemics have also left an indelible mark. Here are four. The Great Plague of AthensThe first documented epidemic in history unfolded right back in the time of the Ancient Greeks. In 430 BC, a deadly disease swept through ancient Athens, a great city at its peak — and at war with the Spartans. In the three years that followed, about a third of the population — as many as 100,000 people — were killed, including the Athenian leader Pericles. The outbreak led to a breakdown of society, and arguably played a role in the eventual defeat of Athens. We still don't know what the devastating disease was: over the years typhus, typhoid, malaria, smallpox, bubonic plague and Ebola have all been offered as the culprit. "I think the best argument has been made for smallpox," Jo Hays, professor emeritus of history, tells ABC RN's Rear Vision. Athens never returned to its former glory and power. Smallpox and the settlement of the AmericasSmallpox changed the future of the Americas after the arrival of Christopher Columbus at the end of the 15th century. "Columbus landed on the island Hispaniola, and there was a native population of Arawaks," historian Frank Snowdon says. "Columbus imagined that he was going to subjugate the Arawak and reduce them to slavery, but this proved impossible because they died. "Within a generation the population had been reduced to 10,000 out of several million, and this was exclusively due to the effect of smallpox."In the years that followed Columbus's voyage, many species of plants and animals crossed the Atlantic Ocean for the first time, in what is sometimes known as the "Columbian exchange". Diseases — many apparently new to the "virgin soil of the Americas", like smallpox, measles and plague — were part of that exchange, says Professor Hays. He says these diseases collectively resulted in the deaths of around 90 per cent of people in the Americas, although there's argument around just what the populations were. "Some people have said [the population] might have been as much as 100 million, others say, no, it's probably only more like 10," he says. "But what is certainly true is that by the end of the century, by 1600, if the population of the Americas was 100 million, it was now 10 million. And if the population was 10 million, it was now 1 million."Unable to enslave the Arawak, Europeans instead turned to Africa. Professor Snowdon says this fuelled the growth of the African slave trade. "Because Africans possessed many of the same disease history that Europeans had, they possessed herd immunity and they were suitable for being enslaved," he says. "So this New World slavery is also a legacy of this lack of immunity or possessing immunity. It was a decisive factor in the whole history of the settlement of the Americas and also Australia and New Zealand."Yellow fever, a slave rebellion and the rise of the USIt wasn't just Columbus whose colonial plans were stopped by infectious disease. Napoleon Bonaparte lost control of the Caribbean colony of Saint-Domingue, now Haiti, because of an epidemic. In 1789, the year the French Revolution began, the French colony was the richest in the world, its wealth created by the labour of half a million black slaves producing sugar, indigo, cotton, cocoa, coffee, and tobacco. In August 1791, the slaves began a revolt to overthrow the French. Professor Snowdon says it was "the biggest slave rebellion in human history". "Something like 50,000 soldiers and sailors were sent to Saint-Domingue to crush the rebellion," he says. But unlike the slaves, the soldiers had no herd immunity to yellow fever, which was rife in the region. By the summer, 80 per cent of the soldiers had died, and the other 20 per cent were too sick to fight. "Napoleon accepted this defeat, withdrew the attempt to restore slavery, and so we have the beginning of decolonisation," Professor Snowdon says. "In addition, Napoleon realised that he didn't have a base for his ambitions in North America, and so he sold, to Thomas Jefferson, Louisiana. "This was the Louisiana Purchase of 1803 that doubled the size of the United States. "So we see yellow fever playing a huge geopolitical role in reorienting the balance of power among the great powers of the period, and we see the emergence of the United States as a very significant regional power to eventually becoming a global power."Cholera and class conflictCholera first appeared in the 19th century, during the Industrial Revolution. It was a time of mass urbanisation, Professor Snowdon says, and with that came overcrowded housing, terrible hygiene practices, and the threat of food and water being contaminated. "Cholera gave rise to enormous social tensions because it was clearly a class disease. People in the slums of Naples or Paris or London could see that with their own eyes," he says. "The people who were middle-class in their midst seemed to have this strange immunity: doctors, priests, the officials of local government. "That's because doctors and priests and officials didn't actually move into the tenements, they didn't take their meals there, they didn't drink the water there."But the poor thought there was a more sinister reason for it: that the disease was a deliberate attempt to rid cities of poverty. "So one sees riots in times of cholera and enormous tensions," Professor Snowdon says. The tension was reciprocated by the wealthier classes. They already feared the working class politically, and now feared them as bringers of disease. "I believe that this is a feature — not the cause, but a feature — in the violence of the repression of social uprisings in the 19th century," Professor Snowdon says. He says in Paris — "the most rebellious city in Europe at the time" — the 1848 revolution was met with extraordinary aggression. "And this was true as well after the Paris Commune [in 1871], which was extraordinarily repressive and violent and bloody," he says. Professor Snowdon says cholera "greatly sharpened" the fears and resentments on both sides of the barricades. "So yes, cholera was a disease of the Industrial Revolution that thrived on social tension and helped also to create it."What will the future hold?The 1918 Spanish flu outbreak was not only the worst pandemic of the 20th century, but also the deadliest in history, killing some 50 million people worldwide. There was a moment in the 1960s and 70s when, with the advent of antibiotics and vaccines, we thought infectious disease was a thing of the past. But we now know that isn't the case. Professor Hays says the modern world is also far more complicated than it ever has been; our populations are more urban and more mobile, so disease can spread faster. We're also living longer, and are more vulnerable as we age. "I think also we continue to rely on what are ultimately political choices where if we are going to combat a disease, we have to decide what is worth spending money on, how and when we are going to spend it," Professor Hays says. How history will record coronavirus is yet to be determined, but experts agree there will be lasting consequences. "It does look as though our world will never be the same. Quite likely the disease will be lasting and endemic and we will have to live with it for a long time," Professor Snowdon says. "I'm not talking about the apocalypse, I'm talking about living together with a dangerous pathogen … that we don't seem to have a clear way of eradicating."He predicts that the way we live and work will change: handshakes will become a thing of the past, we'll rely less on public transport, our economies will be transformed, the entertainment world will take on a new form. "I suspect also that people will learn the lesson at last that our healthcare systems … have to be built in such a way that healthcare is available to everyone, because that's part of the story of the spread of coronavirus, is so many people not having access to healthcare," he says. "I think we are going to be fundamentally transformed as a result of this."
The coronavirus pandemic will change the way we work, with women to reap many of the benefits
For Cynthia Calderon, working from home won't end when the COVID-19 pandemic does. She set up a home office a year ago to spend more time with her son on Fridays when he wasn't at school. Far from getting in the way of her career goals, she was given a promotion. "It was reassurance that if you work and you deliver, then it doesn't matter if you are in the office or at home, you get what you deserve," she said. Ms Calderon works in corporate affairs at engineering and construction company Clough and said more of the firm's staff would take up flexible work after trying it out during the pandemic. Her husband Ricardo Herrera, an engineer at Rio Tinto, has been working from home for the first time and believed the flexibility would stick in his workplace too. Childcare a shared responsibilityThe couple said this would help them share the load at home, which was something they were already working on. When their baby arrives in July, Ms Calderon said she would take the first six months of parental leave before heading back to work and handing over care duties to her husband for at least three months. "Cynthia is a high achiever and I did not want to stop her from work," Mr Herrera said. "I'm a bit scared to be honest, but I think this is a once in a lifetime opportunity to create a bond [with the newborn]."Rigid workplace structures have traditionally been a major barrier for women who, like Ms Calderon, don't want to give up their career due to caring responsibilities. But that has started to change in recent years and some believe an accelerated shift to workplace flexibility could be a silver lining to come out of a pandemic that has disproportionately affected female workers. The 2019 KPMG report She's Price(d)less identified key drivers behind Australia's gender pay gap and opportunities to effect change. Some of these have advanced during the pandemic, including improving work-life balance, increasing the availability of flexible work and increasing the availability of childcare or decreasing its cost. Benefits of working from homeWestern Australia has the nation's biggest gender pay gap at 22 per cent, and Tania Cecconi from CEOs for Gender Equity wanted employers to seize some of the opportunities. "One of the biggest benefits [of the pandemic] has been this huge shift to working from home, which has demanded flexibility for the first time in many organisations that have never delivered it," she said. "Roles that demand a lot of travel or are very inflexible typically lock out women with caring responsibilities. This time has demonstrated that in fact we don't need to have as much travel. "We cannot waste a crisis and I think one of the best learnings is that there are gains to be made and progressive organisations are already looking at the gains."Overall, the coronavirus pandemic has disproportionately hit female workers, with some dubbing it a "she-cession" amid fears it would reverse gains made toward workplace equality. Labour force economist Conrad Liveris said ABS data showed 58 per cent of jobs lost in WA since February belonged to women. He said this was primarily because women were more likely to be employed in part-time roles and female-dominated industries had been the hardest hit. While the most recent payroll data had shown a much steeper decline in men's wages, Mr Liveris said this was likely due to the Federal Government's JobKeeper payments kicking in. Gender pay gap forecast to widenIn WA's mining industry, for example, wages were down 30.8 per cent between March 14 and May 2. "We are likely to see an increased gender pay gap in Western Australia and across the country," Mr Liveris said. "With JobKeeper and decreased male wages we might see it even out a little bit. But over a two-year period, we will see an increase."But he said it wasn't all bad news. "I don't think we can say it is overall a completely negative picture for gender equality, there are some opportunities there," he said. "When we start looking at flexible working and maintaining the childcare sector, those are real opportunities to support women back into the workforce longer term. "Flexible work and working from home were already increasing but now we have an evidence base that all of the things we thought could work, actually can. "I think we will see more men spending more time on care and at home and women working a fair bit more."Childcare 'key to equality'University of Melbourne sociology Professor Lyn Craig said improving workplace flexibility would mainly benefit white-collar workers. "[Working from home] is a thing that happens at the higher echelons and women are disproportionately not [seen] at the higher echelons," she said. "Women are in high contact jobs that are not able to be done apart from in person."She said other opportunities to improve equality had been highlighted during the pandemic, but they would require government investment. She said childcare should stay free, wages should be increased in female-dominated industries such as healthcare, childcare and education that had proven vital, and economic stimulus should be spent in those sectors. "We often think of stimulus as infrastructure — roads and bridges — and that this is what makes the economy work and is nation-building," she said. "But in an economy that is heavily service-oriented, essential infrastructure includes things like childcare, because it makes it possible for those jobs to happen. "With great times of crisis comes great opportunity so it is possible that this will turn out to be a turning point, but it will depend on the opportunities being seized."Professor Craig said the free childcare initiative introduced during the pandemic, which was likely to end soon, was the most obvious way to improve equality. "It is uneconomic for most women to put their children into childcare for more than three days a week, so most of them don't," she said. Public sector reform mootedIn March, the WA Government launched a 10-year plan to address gender inequality, which included a target of 50 per cent women in top-level public service positions. Women's Interests Minister Simone McGurk said the state had struggled with a gender equity problem for many years. "We have had the highest gender pay gap in the country for a number of decades now and we need to do better," she said. "It is something we are committed to [improving] and we are calling on industry to be aware of these challenges as they rebuild post-COVID-19. "There are a lot of opportunities [out of the pandemic]. For instance, the ability for people to work from home, to work different hours, to have more flexible practices. "Some of our private sector are leading the way in that. In the public sector we need to get better at that."
'Justice hasn't changed, just the mode of delivery': How Victorian courts are adapting to coronavirus
Fuzzy pictures, distorted sounds, internet signals that freeze or drop out — we're all experiencing problems with videoconferencing in our lives. Key points:Victorian courts have had to change how they run because of the coronavirus pandemicThe courts are using more videoconferencing for remote hearingsDespite delays in some cases, senior judges say the arrangements are ensuring justice is done in VictoriaBut for Victoria's Chief Magistrate, Lisa Hannan, the COVID-19 pandemic has added complications — how to juggle 145 magistrates over 51 jurisdictions across the state, as well as the needs of thousands of lawyers and defendants. "There are occasional technical glitches," Chief Magistrate Hannan said. "But this is a learning exercise amongst other things."At the Melbourne Magistrates' Court, the number of videolink hearings has doubled to a recent peak of 244 a day, as a result of the pandemic. "We have transformed what has been largely a paper-based court to a court that is now hearing Webex hearings," Chief Magistrate Hannan said, referring to the online meeting software. Chief Magistrate Lisa Hannan told the ABC every change to the system had been carefully considered. Before the pandemic took hold, 2,000 people went in and out of the Magistrates' Court in Melbourne every day. Now, traffic is about a tenth of that. On any given day, only half of the rostered magistrates are working at the courts, with the rest working from home. Only the most urgent cases are being heard — such as bail applications and plea hearings, as well as cases involving those in custody, or people making family violence applications. Some lawyers and some prisoners or remandees are still attending court, but only if physical distancing can be achieved. Courts face tech constraints and deliver email judgmentsThe Criminal Bar Association of Victoria's vice-chair, Sally Flynn QC, said there had been problems with the number of links available and time restrictions that applied to videoconferencing. "Certainly it's difficult when you don't have ready access to your client, for example if we're dealing over videolink, or an instructing solicitor," Ms Flynn said. Victorian Legal Aid's director of criminal law, Dan Nicholson, said that was especially so for the most vulnerable clients in the system. "[For] our clients who have disabilities or require interpreters, it can be harder for them to participate in their hearings when they are done remotely," he said. While lawyers agree the system under COVID-19 as it stands is not perfect, some say the courts needed to change before the pandemic struck. Mr Nicholson said there were opportunities for a better system overall if the courts could improve the technology and the processes used. "Unfortunately the experience of a lot of people at court on the day is paper-based chaos really," he said. Across the varying court jurisdictions there's been a rapid and radical shift since the pandemic began, as large sections of the work of the courts has moved online. The biggest change is that jury trials have been suspended because of the risks of having groups of people together for extended periods of time. Emergency legislation allows judge-only trials but defendants have to consent to a judge-only hearing. As yet, the ABC understands that no applications have been received in any Victorian court. The Court of Appeal has continued to operate as usual, while commercial and civil matters in the Supreme Court are also proceeding. There are few, if any, people in court. The Supreme Court is upgrading its technological capabilities to host more web-based hearings, allocating staff to help set up virtual hearings. Some rulings are even being made via email. Finding a way to keep the courts running"Shutting the doors was not an option," the Supreme Court's Chief Justice Anne Ferguson told lawyers in a recent webinar hosted by the Victorian Bar Association. "[The change] has shown us we didn't need to be afraid," she said. "There's a real upside, an opportunity to drop the barriers to look at different ways to do things because we've had to."Traditionally, the industry has been heavily dependent on in-person meetings — whether it's an initial briefing with a client, or court hearings. For those who are in custody, court restrictions are being exacerbated by a prison ban on visitors, which means lawyers have to rely on telephone and video links too. Ms Flynn, from the Criminal Bar Association, said it was important lawyers could communicate with their clients. "It's imperative that we have access to clients to be able to get instructions to effectively act for clients in court and properly represent them," she said. Matters are also being adjourned until much later in the year, in the hope hearings can return to some kind of normalcy at some point. Delays prompt a rise in bail applicationsFor Ms Flynn, the delays are concerning. "Justice delayed is always justice denied and it is important that we try to minimise those delays as much as possible," she said. Chief Magistrate Hannan admits there will be a backlog. "Justice may be delayed in some cases but we will work very hard to ensure those cases are heard as soon as possible," she said. The delays have prompted a spike in the number of bail applications, as lawyers argue the restrictions within prisons on visitors and inmate programs because of the coronavirus pandemic are denying their clients timely justice. Earlier this month, inmate Mark Rowson's lawyers argued he should be released because he was at risk of dying if a coronavirus outbreak occurred in the prison. The system under COVID-19 restrictions also disadvantages those who want to represent themselves, because they are not linked in to the court's communications system and they are currently unable to access public libraries and public legal resources. There are also concerns about what happens to clients who can't meet bail or Community Corrections Order conditions, because of disruptions to alcohol, drug and other court-mandated services. Is the new system fair enough?Some lawyers are worried the many changes made to court practices during the pandemic could lead to an uptick in challenges and appeals. But Chief Magistrate Hannan rejects the idea that changes have been made too quickly. "I don't accept that anything's been done on the fly," she said. "We have considered each and every change that we have made. "The practice directions have been considered in terms of their impacts upon all stakeholders. "Justice hasn't changed, just the mode of delivery."County Court Chief Judge Peter Kidd told ABC radio last week that the courts were working in a compromised environment, but said the system was delivering justice. "It's not a perfect environment, it's not business as usual," he said"But is it more than satisfactory so that justice is done? The answer is yes."
Coronavirus shutdowns have exposed Australia's manufacturing gaps, Industry Minister Karen Andrews says
The coronavirus pandemic has exposed gaps in Australia's manufacturing capability however "complete self-sufficiency" should not be Australia's goal, according to the Federal Industry Minister. Key points:Global supply chains have been disrupted by coronavirus shutdowns in other countriesLocal manufacturers have ramped up production of key health and food supplies during the pandemicKaren Andrews says there is a groundswell of support for Australian-made productsIn a speech to the National Press Club today, Karen Andrews is expected to say there was a "a lot of scepticism" that local manufacturers could quickly ramp up demand for personal protective equipment like face masks, ventilators and hand sanitiser in response to COVID-19. "When we first began preparing for this crisis I was told that Australia would not be able to make more than about 37 million surgical masks a year – we're now expecting to produce more than 200 million this year," she is expected to say. "I refused to accept the advice that Australian manufacturers would only be able to fill small gaps in supply. "Capability exists in this country. What was needed was a change in the culture of how we think about our capability, about how we challenge the status quo."The pandemic has brought Australia's reliance on other countries into sharp focus, with Ms Andrews saying disruptions to global supply chains were a wake up call for many businesses. However, she argued the future of local manufacturing was not about "re-living a golden era". "While COVID-19 has brought issues such as sovereign capability to the forefront and, frankly, exposed gaps in our manufacturing, I am not suggesting that complete self-sufficiency should be our goal," she said. "There are many things Australia won't and shouldn't be making, but it is clear we cannot just rely on foreign supply chains for the essential items we need in a crisis. "We can't supply all our wants locally, but we have to be able to supply, or at least pivot our production processes to produce the goods we need. "And we need to compete on value, not on cost."The Minister said manufacturing had faced its own "existential challenges" over many decades and that while the decline of Australia's car industry attracted a lot of attention, other sectors such as food and beverage production were growing even before the pandemic. In her speech, Ms Andrews is expected to argue that cutting red tape across all levels of government was the most significant change that could be made without drawing on taxpayer funding, saying the crisis had shown changes that would normally take years could be made within weeks if necessary. "[Industry group] Manufacturing Australia cite the fact that a factory can be proposed, approved, built and operational in America in less time than it takes to jump the very first approval hurdle in Australia," she will tell the Press Club. "That's simply not good enough."She also is expected to say there is a "groundswell" of support from Australian consumers who will continue to demand more locally-produced products as the nation emerged from the crisis. "There's a real sense that in a post-COVID world, where norms have indeed been disrupted, there will be an adjustment of our fast, disposable, retail approach," she said. "A return to quality over quantity."
Coronavirus study to track the experiences of expectant mums during global pandemic
Brisbane woman Amy Buchanan had little idea what to expect from her first pregnancy — let alone one in the midst of a global health emergency. Key points:Expectant mum Amy Buchanan was told she might have to give birth to her first child on her ownThe global study will survey 10,000 women and partners about the care they received before and after their birth amid COVID-19Many women have reported feeling anxious, isolated and alone while pregnant during the pandemicThe 31-year-old's first child is due in a fortnight and the wait for its arrival has been anxious. Prior to coronavirus restrictions being lifted, Ms Buchanan was faced with the prospect of having to give birth to her first child alone — without her husband, family, trusted medical team or support network. "It would have been terrifying," she said. "We don't know what to expect, so it isn't just navigating pregnancy for the first time but navigating it during a health crisis. "We were unable to do birthing classes at the hospital, or to do group education sessions or hospital visits — all of that stuff was cancelled. "So not only are you potentially birthing by yourself but you also don't get the education in the lead-up to it."Complicating matters further, Ms Buchanan and her husband are also both frontline workers at the Caboolture Hospital, where coronavirus positive patients have been admitted. "It's such a new virus, we don't know whether I could contract it and pass it on to the baby via vertical transmission or what that would mean," she said. Global study to track pandemic pregnanciesAn Australian research centre is leading a new global study into how maternity services, pregnant women and new mothers have been impacted by the outbreak of coronavirus. The Stillbirth Centre of Research Excellence said the project hoped to survey 10,000 new mums and pregnant women, and their partners. Principal investigator Vicki Flenady said researchers would focus on the use of telehealth appointments, the psychological impacts of social isolation, and the support offered to families. "There's a concern with the move to telehealth for routine antenatal care [before and after birth] that we might be missing important opportunities to keep mothers and babies safe," Professor Flenady said. "We want to hear about these experiences from women to ensure we are giving them the best care. "Most hospitals have stopped running large antenatal clinics and [are] only seeing those women at more increased risk, so there's a concern that some women may be falling through the cracks. "We got some real anecdotal evidence from women saying how anxious they are about the change in the care, the feeling of isolation and being alone during this time."Professor Flenady said the results of the survey would be used to improve current and future maternity services for pregnant couples in a health crisis. Several countries were already onboard with the project including the United Kingdom, Ireland, Spain, Italy, Germany, France, Canada, India and Laos. 'Stronger mothers for this'Mary Thomas and her husband Bo welcomed their daughter Polly on May 9 and the new parents said while there were moments of nervousness leading up to the birth there were positives to being in lockdown. "I actually like that it's lockdown — I loved having just Bo and I during labour and not having visitors, so it was optimal bonding time for babe and I," she said. "I still feel really supported but also not overwhelmed as I couldn't imagine having visitors over every single day."In the weeks before giving birth, Ms Thomas said she had an epiphany about having a baby during a global pandemic. "As a mama-to-be, struggling to find that sense of calm as [I was] about to give birth during these uncertain and fearful times — I had an epiphany that changed my perspective around this entire situation," she said. "As I was packing my hospital bag, I started to cry, about to reach for my phone and call my husband for reassurance [but] something stopped me. "It was the figures of strong women in my family who birthed before me."She said it was time "to remember the lineage of strong women before you and where you came from". "Harness that collective power within and bring that with you when you birth your beautiful baby into this world," she said. "What will our babies' generation bring? The babies that were born during a pandemic? They're a force to be reckoned with. "They're the game changers, the leaders, the creators, the peacemakers — we will all be stronger women, stronger mothers for this."Virus impacts services, behaviours of pregnant womenProfessor Flenady said the question of how best to care for women and families during a pandemic was one being considered by health professionals around the world. "We'll be able to compare the experiences that women are having during this time against the different policies that are in place across countries," she said. "We hope to learn a lot from that in terms of what's acceptable and what sort of step we need to put in place to support women at this time."Professor Flenady said while current evidence indicated pregnant women were not more severely affected by COVID-19 than the general population, the pandemic was affecting the delivery of antenatal services and the behaviours of pregnant women. "There's no evidence to indicate that pregnant women are more susceptible to COVID-19 or that their babies are at any particular increased risk," she said. "However, the worrying consequence of the outbreak is that women are maybe reluctant to seek medical attention when they need it. "Such as when they experience warning signs of decreased foetal movement and this may put them at increased risk of stillbirth. "We know that stillbirth is not a rare occurrence, six families a day endure that heartache of a stillborn baby, so we want to understand women's concerns more."
NSW schools coronavirus shutdown is ending next week — here's what you need to know
NSW schools will see students back in the classrooms next week, but its not going to be business as usual for children and teachers amid remaining coronavirus restrictions. Key points:State students will return to full-time campus learning next MondayMs Berejiklian said it will become "common" to see schools close from infectionsHowever, kids are at low risk of being infected with coronavirus, experts saidNSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian previously said she wanted kids back in the classroom from Term 3, beginning July 21, but has since brought forward the date by about nine weeks. "The health advice is very clear: a return to full-time face-to-face teaching is safe," Ms Berejiklian said. Under the new guidelines, students will be able to use the school library, continue with apprenticeships, attend after-school care and mingle in the schoolyard. However, school excursions including camps, as well as work experience, debating and sport with other school communities will not be permitted. Are all Australian students going back to school?No — in NSW, all public school students have been ordered to return to the classroom next Monday, but Catholic and private schools are under no obligation to follow suit. NSW Catholic Schools said it aimed to have all 250,000 students back by the end of May, though no exact date has been provided yet. In Queensland, about 80 per cent of state school students returned to campuses full-time this week, and the remainder are set to join next Monday. In Victoria, all state school students will be in classrooms again by June 9, with students in preprimary, Year 1, Year 2, and Years 11 and 12 to return next Monday, too. Are children at risk?It's "extremely rare" to see COVID-19 cases among children both in Australia and overseas, consultant paediatrician Kirsten Perrett told the ABC. "Most of the time [with] respiratory viruses such as influenza, children are actually more susceptible to infection and severe disease, but this is not the case that we're seeing with COVID-19," Dr Perrett said. This may be because kids' immune systems are better at dealing with infections that they've never seen before, Dr Perrett explained. "If this was influenza," infectious disease physician and microbiologist Peter Collignon added, "we would keep schools closed until this was over". How will schools keep students safe?School students will not be required to socially distance from their peers, but have been told to maintain a 1.5-metre distance from their teachers and other school staff. Good hygiene practices will be encouraged, like washing hands regularly, avoiding sharing food or drinks and coughing or sneezing into the elbow. The Department of Education said it had provided schools with unlimited supplies of soap, sanitiser, disinfectant wipes and personal protective equipment (like masks). High-contact areas on campus, like door handles, lockers, light switches and handrails, will continue to receive additional cleaning, the department said. Students will receive priority over other passengers on public transport and will not be turned away from boarding a service, the department added. What if a student tests positive?If a case of coronavirus is found within the school community, lockdown protocol — including calling in health authorities, closing the school and contact tracing — will continue to take place. Since the pandemic began in March, numerous Sydney schools have shut temporarily after a confirmed case, including Epping Boys High School, Normanhurst West Public School, Warragamba Public School and St Mary's Senior High School. Ms Berejiklian said moving forward it would be "common ... for schools to be shut down temporarily". What if I choose not to send my child to school?Campuses have been open in NSW only for the children of essential workers for the past eight weeks, in a bid to slow the spread of coronavirus. However, from Monday, authorities have warned parents students will be marked absent if they are in good health but remain at home. "The message is schools return next week and students need to be back in the classroom," Minister for Education Sarah Mitchell said. "Rolls will be marked as per normal and unexplained absences will be followed up. "You should be at school — as long as you are well."
Cinemas, camping, gyms and footy training: The latest coronavirus rules around your favourite recreational activities
Parts of Australia are slowly beginning to wake up after a coronavirus-induced hibernation, with businesses and activities gradually returning to normal. But that doesn't mean flipping a switch and things going back to the way they were before. The Prime Minister recently announced a three-step framework, detailing how certain industries can start reopening to the public. But it's up to each state and territory to decide how and when they roll back their restrictions, and which businesses will be allowed to do what. It's also up to each state and territory government whether restrictions return if COVID-19 cases start to rise again. Here's what we know so far about some common activities. When will gyms reopen?Step one of the national three-step frame work doesn't permit any indoor physical activity, including at gyms. But it does allow up to 10 people to participate in outdoor sport, and some gyms and boot camps have taken advantage of that by offering limited outdoor classes if their location allows. Some states are keener than others to start working off all that extra Uber Eats. Gyms are open in the Northern Territory, but you shouldn't be there for more than two hours (props to you if you're working out longer than that). In Western Australia, up to 20 people can now participate in indoor and outdoor fitness classes as long as there's no shared equipment. Indoor gyms are still closed in New South Wales and Victoria — NSW says outdoor exercise equipment can be used "with caution", while Victoria says don't touch it. Up to 10 people are allowed to join outdoor gyms or bootcamps in Tasmania, the ACT and Queensland. South Australia has a 10-person limit for outdoor non-contact sports at the moment, and gyms are flagged to reopen on June 8. Step three of the national framework says venues can welcome up to 100 people at a time, so lots of owners are in the process of working out how they're going to implement those limits. One condition of gyms reopening to up to 20 people at a time is that they must adhere to the four square metre rule (so some smaller gyms may have to limit their attendees to even less than 20). Every gym has their own COVID-19 plan, so contact your facility to see how they're implementing it and the conditions of their reopening before you go. What about cinemas?No cinemas yet — but in some places, they're not far off. The national framework says indoor movie theatres can open for up to 20 people in step two and up to 100 people in step three. Queensland is adopting this part of the plan for stage two of their roadmap, which is expected to begin on June 12, as has South Australia, where cinemas and theatres are to reopen on June 8. Cinemas are set to reopen in the Northern Territory on June 5, and Western Australia has also flagged reopening cinemas with gathering limits as part of their third phase of easing restrictions, which we should hear more about in the next few weeks. There's not a lot of detail available at the moment about what distances people would have to sit apart when cinemas do reopen. Cinemas and theatres in New South Wales are still closed for now, as they are in the ACT, Tasmania and Victoria (but Tasmania has flagged reopening cinemas to up to 20 people from June 15). Can I go to brunch?In most states and territories, you can — but the process might be a little different to what we're used to. Up to 20 patrons can sit in cafes and restaurants in Western Australia, but Queensland, Tasmania, the ACT and New South Wales venues are limited to 10 customers at a time for now. Outdoor dining in small groups has resumed in South Australia, as long as everyone is appropriately distanced. Table service is still not allowed in Victoria, but you can get takeaway. Restaurants, cafes, food courts and sports or RSL clubs are open again in the Northern Territory, but as with gyms, they have a two-hour time limit. Some restaurants and cafes require people to have downloaded the COVIDSafe app or to provide their contact details before they can dine at the venue for contact tracing purposes, and because of customer limits, pre-bookings are recommended. Or perhaps a nightclub?Sorry party animals — nightclubs aren't at the top of the list to reopen first in most places. The NT is ready to party though, they're reopening nightclubs, concert halls, dance halls and bars on June 5. Queensland has listed nightclubs as one of the venues that can have up to 100 people from July 10, but that's subject to further planning. Nightclubs have also been listed as a "future step for consideration" in South Australia, but there's no date on that for now. The national framework recommends nightclubs don't open until the third stage of the three-step plan — but when they do, they can have up to 100 people. It also recommends that places like brothels and strip clubs stay closed until further notice. I miss camping! Can I go?Not in Victoria, there's still a ban on camping in national parks there. Camping in a state park or campground is still prohibited in Tasmania too, but is flagged in their second stage of easing restrictions that starts on June 15, and campgrounds in the ACT are also closed. Campgrounds and caravan parks remain closed in NSW, unless you work or permanently live there. Queenslanders are only allowed to go on day trips at the moment, but from June 12 camping in national and state parks will be back on, and people can travel up to 250km from home to do it. But in South Australia, regional travel is allowed again and campgrounds and caravan parks are allowed to reopen, again with all the necessary social distancing. Camping is also permitted in Western Australia in accordance with travel restrictions — there are still some intrastate borders in place in WA, and campers must observe the 10-person gathering limit. Similarly in the Northern Territory, you can camp but you can't enter restricted biosecurity zones, so it's best to check what parks are open and the activities you can do there before you go. Can my footy team train and play?Organised training is allowed for sports teams in the Northern Territory, and playing team sports is expected to be allowed from June 5. In Western Australia you can play non-contact sport with up to 20 people (some contact sport is expected return in their next phase). Right now in Queensland up to 10 people can play non-contact sport outdoors, but from June 12, up to 20 people can gather for "non-contact indoor and outdoor community sport". Outdoor sports training is allowed in South Australia for up to 10 people, and competitive sport is flagged to resume from June 8, including indoor sport. The ACT is allowing up to 10 people to participate in social sport, as long as it's non-contact and outdoors, and up to 10 people can do non-contact training in Tasmania too. In Victoria, sport can resume if it's outside, non-competitive, everyone stays at least 1.5 metres apart and there's no more than ten people in a group — so if you can't modify your sport so there's no contact, it's not allowed. New South Wales also says people must stay 1.5 metres apart outdoors, and no more than 10 people can gather. I want all my loved ones at my wedding. Is that allowed?Depends how long your list of loved ones is. Restrictions limiting attendance at weddings and funerals have been particularly tough, but these are slowly starting to relax in most states and territories. The Northern Territory doesn't specify a limit on outdoor weddings, and in Queensland the current 10-person limit is set to increase to 20 from June 12 and up to 100 from July 10. Western Australian weddings can have up to 20 people inside or 30 people outside. Ten guests can also attend a wedding in New South Wales right now, not including the couple, celebrant and photographer. Victoria has a similar rule — 10 guests plus the couple and celebrant — same in Tasmania. The ACT also has a 10-person rule for weddings — there, it includes the couple, but doesn't include the celebrant and photographer. South Australia also includes the couple in their 10-person limit, but not a celebrant or "necessary staff". There's various social distancing and hygiene conditions to holding weddings no matter where you are, so check with your venue first. If you have guests who are interstate, don't forget some states and territories still have strict border restrictions in place. Guests may be forced to quarantine after crossing the border, or if they don't have the appropriate exemptions they may not be allowed to cross at all. When can my kids go back to dance class?Or basketball practice, or swimming lessons, or orchestra… It all depends where they do their extracurricular activities, and how many people are in the group. In Queensland, for example, from June 12, up to 20 people will be allowed at pools, community sports clubs, theatres, auditoriums, health clubs and yoga studios. The Northern Territory has already opened studios again for dance classes and organised training for sports teams is back on too. Outdoor sports training can go ahead in South Australia in small groups, and community halls and clubrooms can open, but they have to keep any indoor sporting facilities closed. But in New South Wales dance halls are still closed, as are all indoor recreation facilities and indoor public pools. The ACT allows small groups to play and train for social sport and for swimming lessons to take place, but all indoor and outdoor gatherings can have a maximum of 10 people including children. In Victoria, small group lessons at places like community centres "cannot resume at this time" and contact sport is off the table — but from Monday, new protocols will allow for some gathering-limited, socially distanced AFL and netball training to resume. Tasmania says any indoor venue used for sport and recreation can't open or operate, including those used for dance, cheer and gymnastics, but non-contact sports training is allowed in groups of 10. In Western Australia up to 20 people can partake in fitness and non-contact sports, swim in public pools or gather at community facilities. We've heard estimates about overseas travel not returning before 2021, and even that air travel might not fully go back to normal until 2023. But for now, all overseas travel is currently banned and exceptions to the rule are few and far between. There's a chance we could be able to visit New Zealand before international borders completely reopen, but there's no guarantees on that right now. That dream overseas holiday will have to wait a little while longer. The main thing to remember... Every state and territory is rolling back their restrictions differently. Within that, each business is coming up with their own plans to meet requirements based on their particular location, facilities, staff and style of operation. National Cabinet is reviewing the progress of easing restrictions regularly, as are state and territory governments, so there is a chance that restrictions could remain in place or even be brought back if safety is at risk. If you're not sure about something, check your state or territory government's website or contact the business directly to ask how they're doing things.
Young people warned about coronavirus amid relaxed restrictions in restaurants and bars
Health authorities in NSW have confirmed three new cases of coronavirus from almost 9,000 tests done yesterday, bringing the state's total infections to 3,086. Of the three new cases, all were overseas cases identified during the mandatory 14-day hotel quarantine, Dr Christine Selvey from NSW Health said. She said there was no risk of community transmission from those cases. Health Minister Brad Hazzard said it was crucial that high testing rates continued, particularly as eased coronavirus restrictions meant restaurants and bars would open their doors to more patrons. "It's absolutely essential as we move forward and we try to relax some of the restrictions we've lived under for the past few months," he said. He highlighted that one in five people who tested positive for coronavirus have been within the 20-29 age bracket. "I want to emphasise again the danger of young people who may be asymptomatic or might have mild symptoms," he said. "As we are freeing up our restrictions, particularly around clubs and hotels and so on … these young people who may think they are invincible, are actually not invincible. "With these freedoms come big responsibilities." Under the relaxed coronavirus restrictions from June 1, hospitality venues will be required to adhere to strict guidelines to operate: Mr Hazzard refused to comment on the specifics of the rules, reiterating that industry consultation was ongoing, but stressed that social distancing was essential to the success of eased restrictions. When asked about when beauty therapists can commence business again, Mr Hazzard said plans were in motion but did not provide a timeline. Mr Hazzard also announced a $34 million program to train physiotherapists to deal with the "horrific lung conditions" associated with the virus. 
Australian coronavirus death toll rises after Victorian man in his 60s dies in hospital
The Australian coronavirus death toll has risen to 102, after a Victorian man died in hospital overnight. "Our condolences are with the family and friends of this person at this time," Victoria's Deputy Chief Health Officer Annaliese van Diemen said at a press conference this afternoon. "The person was a man in his 60s who died in a Victorian hospital. "The family wish for their privacy to be protected at this point so no further details will be given at this point in time." The state's 19th death comes after a week in which Victoria has been home to the majority of Australia's new reported cases. New South Wales recorded its 50th coronavirus fatality yesterday, after an 80-year-old Sydney woman who was exposed to the virus at an outpatient hospital clinic died. Victoria has recorded 10 new coronavirus cases since yesterday, including four returned travellers in hotel quarantine and six cases under investigation. None of the new cases are currently linked to the Cedar Meats outbreak in Melbourne's west, which sits at 111 cases including 67 staff. Updated Sunday, May 24 But Dr van Diemen said it was possible investigation of the cases could reveal links to the Cedar Meats outbreak or another cluster at the Fawkner McDonald's restaurant. "As we've discussed, some of these results come in quite late at night, so it does [need] quite a bit of investigating to link that into the other outbreaks or known cases, so we're just seeing what those investigations show us," she said. When asked about Victoria's historically high number of cases believed to be community transmission, Dr van Diemen said it was because the state was "testing more". "We're doing significantly increased testing compared to other states at the moment, so the more we test, the more we will find and we want to find these individual cases because we want to be able to put that ring around them and make sure there is no transmission," she said. "The harder we look, the more we will find." Victoria's state school students in prep, year 1 and 2 as well as years 11 and 12 are due to return to classrooms from Tuesday. When asked if Victorians using public transport should be using face masks, Dr van Diemen reiterated Federal Government advice that the majority of people would not benefit from wearing a surgical mask. "Our advice on top of that for commuters is to be very vigilant, don't use public transport if you're sick, be aware of physical distancing and ensure really good cough and sneeze etiquette," she said. She said health authorities were working closely with the Department of Transport and unions to look at possible measures to support physical distancing. 
Donald Trump's cries about 'Obamagate' are a ploy to distract the media from the coronavirus
In the past week, a rebadged conspiracy theory has been breathlessly promoted by the US President and conservative media pundits: OBAMAGATE! It's not worth discussing at length. But in summary, the story is essentially an updated version of a long-running fringe theory that the Obama administration and the nefarious "deep state" illegally sabotaged Donald Trump from the very start, partly by entrapping his former national security adviser Michael Flynn in the Russia scandal. There is no evidence to tether the vague narrative to reality. Even Trump, when asked for more details, has struggled to specify what criminal activity took place: "It's been going on for a very long time," the President recently mused. "You know what the crime is. The crime is obvious to everybody." Let's be clear; this entire theory is a diversion, a predictable move from the Trump political playbook. While "Obamagate" is being covered and debunked by media outlets, less time is spent reporting on the 90,000-odd Americans killed by the coronavirus, the Administration's slow pandemic response or the human cost of the worst economic crisis America has seen since the Great Depression of the 1930s. Steve Bannon, the President's former strategist, is often credited with best distilling this strategy. "The Democrats don't matter," he reportedly said in 2018. "The real opposition is the media. And the best way to deal with them is to flood the zone with shit." In an ideal world, media outlets would simply filter out the metaphorical faecal matter, reporting what's right and ignoring what's wrong. But in reality, the US industry in the digital age is more partisan than ever and certain sections are often diametrically opposed. Key figures, like the President, can also simply turn to social media to spread their messages. For journalists, following the range of competing narratives for a living can be tiring. For casual observers, making sense of what's accurate, what's exaggerated and what's fake can be completely overwhelming, particularly in an era where increasingly cash-strapped companies value conflict, sensational headlines and clicks above reasoned, fact-based coverage. Some people tune out totally: a few surveys suggest as many as two-thirds of Americans feel worn-out by the torrent of information. Many others retreat to their ideological corners, limiting themselves to programs, presenters and pundits that largely reinforce their preconceived world view. Consensus, even during a once-in-a-century crisis, is much harder to come by. Of course, Trump and his team didn't create this environment — but they do thrive in it. When the daily media cycle is going against them, it's often easily upended with an inflammatory tweet or outrageous press conference. If that doesn't work or a crisis lingers, alternate realities are promoted. During the historic impeachment trial, hours of airtime were dedicated to discussing and debunking theories about Joe Biden's son, Hunter. In the midst of the Mueller investigation, the longest-serving (right-wing) foreign minister in Australian history, Alexander Downer, was talked about as a Clinton-loving deep-state superspy. Even when fact-checkers are able to keep up, their findings can simply serve to elevate the initial fabrication. Arguably even this piece is part of the problem — how many of you had heard of "Obamagate" before now? The whole purpose of "flooding the zone" is to distract and muddy the waters to obscure inconvenient facts. New York University professor Jay Rosen and Vox journalist Sean Illing have written about this phenomenon at length, arguing the media has failed to adapt to Trump's tactics. At this point, it's worth emphasising the coronavirus crisis is totally different from anything else the Trump Administration has faced so far. Unlike impeachment or the Russia probe, the pandemic has upended the everyday lives of Americans. It's much harder to distract voters from something that's landing their loved ones in hospital or making it impossible to put food on the table. Trump's bungled response is pretty clearly on the public record too. He repeatedly, publicly diminished the threat of the virus, comparing it to the flu and stating that it would soon disappear, and failed to act early enough to contain much of the damage.  Several Republican and many Democratic strategists now believe that if this year's election becomes a referendum on Trump's record, he will lose. So far, the White House and the President's campaign have responded by increasing the amount of detritus in "the zone". "Obamagate" is just one note in a crescendo of recent attempts to rile the nation, spread misinformation and reignite old feuds. The President repeatedly attacked governors and smeared whistle-blowers. Trump's son, Don Jr, has even made baseless insinuations about Joe Biden. More than anything, these developments seem a sign of the Commander-in-Chief's distress. A recent national poll has him 11 points behind Biden. The pandemic may be narrowing his path to a second term.  As voting day approaches, the metaphorical "flood" is only likely to grow as team Trump tries to bounce back and keep this presidency afloat. 
Health authorities will not see Liberal MPs' coronavirus survey results, Premier Steven Marshall says
Health authorities will not see the results of a Liberal Party survey of voters' views on easing coronavirus restrictions, SA Premier Steven Marshall says. The survey asked households to rank which restriction they would like to see eased next. Listed options included community sport, professional sport, international and interstate travel, festivals and concerts, weddings, funerals, places of worship, hospitality, gyms and cinemas.  Premier Steven Marshall said the individual Liberal MPs who authorised the survey would keep the results — and they would not be presented to the state's COVID-19 transition committee. "They haven't asked for it at this stage," Mr Marshall said.  "There is absolutely nothing wrong with getting information from your electorate, in fact, we encourage it. "I don't think it's something the Liberal Party is doing — there are Liberal members of parliament, there are Labor members of parliament … [getting] feedback. "It's done by all political parties." Labor MP Chris Picton said the COVID-19 restrictions survey was different to other political surveys — including those previously issued by his own party — because this one sought to use the coronavirus health crisis for "political ends". "This is not a legitimate exercise — it's a purely political exercise," Mr Picton said. "This is not going to the health ministry — it is not going to [SA Chief Public Health Officer] Nicola Spurrier and the health experts. "It's going to the Liberal Party as part of their political campaigning." Katina Michael from the University of Wollongong said data collection was critical to the way modern political parties operate — but it was difficult to track how data was used and stored.  "Political parties in Australia are exempt from the Privacy Act 1988, from the Spam Act 2003 and the Do Not Call Register Act 2006, so there's a lot of mystery surrounding what political parties do with the data they collect," she said. "Our laws need to catch up with what can and cannot be done in the name of elections, in the name of campaigning, in the name of service provision. "I think we have to start asking [these] questions." Professor Michael said survey recipients should exercise caution when responding to material received in the letterbox, over the phone or online.  "Not every survey we receive is a valid one — you have a choice [whether to participate]," she said. "[You should ask] what is the premise and the underlying motive behind that survey? "How is your data going to be used and what kind of feedback are you going to receive for the usage of your data? "Will it be stored for 'x' number of years, until the next election?" 
Spain prepares to open its borders after coronavirus lockdown as anti-government protesters fill the streets
Spain will reopen its borders to tourists in July and its top football division will kick off again in June, Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez has announced, marking another phase in the easing of one of the world's strictest lockdowns. Mr Sanchez's dual announcements coincided with calls for his resignation over the lockdown's impact on the economy from the far-right Vox party, whose calls for protests in cities across Spain drew thousands of horn-blaring cars and motorbikes. "From July, foreign tourism will resume in safe conditions. We will guarantee tourists will not take any risks and will not bring us any risks," Mr Sanchez told a televised news conference, without giving further details. Foreign visitors contribute around an eighth of Spain's economic output and the Government curbs — taken to contain one of Europe's severest coronavirus outbreaks — shuttered everything from hotels, bars and restaurants to beaches and leisure parks just as its tourism season got underway. Spain's overnight death toll from the coronavirus rose by 48 to a total of 28,678, the seventh straight day the fatality rate was less than 100, while the total number of cases rose to 235,290. Restrictions on movement are being gradually eased, with bars in some parts of the country already being allowed to open their terraces, and museums and churches reopening — though residents of Madrid and Barcelona, both national epicentres of the virus, will only follow suit on Monday. Mr Sanchez said there would be a 10-day period of national mourning for victims, starting on Tuesday. Several-thousand followers of the Vox party gathered in their cars and on motorbikes in the centre of Madrid and other Spanish cities to protest against the Government's handling of the coronavirus crisis. The party accuses the Government and Mr Sanchez of lying about the impact of the health crisis and of violating Spaniards' rights by confining people to their homes and closing businesses during the lockdown. Vox called for protesters to attend the rallies in their vehicles and thus skirt the ban on social gatherings. Vox called the protest the "Caravan for Spain and Liberty". "We will never forget what they have done," Vox leader Santiago Abascal said from the open-top bus leading the caravan as it inched down a Madrid boulevard. "Do not doubt that we will make them face justice. They know it and fear our freedom. That is why they try to intimidate us." Most cars and motorbikes were decked with Spanish flags. There were also small groups of people who participated on foot, with some not respecting the 2-metre social-distancing rules. Protests were also held in Barcelona, Sevilla and other provincial capitals. Spain's Government said the confinement measures were necessary to save the nation's hospitals from collapse and to save thousands of lives. ABC/wires 
Racist attack in Launceston and other coronavirus taunts prompt plea for calm
Three people claim to have been the target of a racially motivated attack early this week as they walked to the public toilets near a supermarket in Launceston. They said items were thrown at them, they were called "Corona", and a phone was hit from one of their hands as they tried to record what was happening.  Late Wednesday night, authorities confirmed no new cases of coronavirus had been diagnosed, with the state's total remaining at 226. Sarah Bolt, the state's anti-discrimination commissioner, said she had heard of other targeted racial incidents in relation to coronavirus.  "There has been a stark increase in the number of reports and inquiries in relation to discrimination on the basis of race, and the recipients of those tirades have been predominantly people from Asia or who are of Asian appearance," she said.  "And again, most of them have all related to COVID-19." This type of targeted racial abuse was condemned by police in Hobart in March, when a Hong Kong student was taunted and punched for wearing a medical face mask at a local supermarket. The student was with a friend in the New Town Plaza car park when a man shouted "you've got the virus" and "go back to your country". Ms Bolt said racially fuelled attacks created fear and anxiety for those on the receiving end. "I've spoken to members of the Chinese community who talked about people being frightened to go to the shops or to go about their daily business in fear of being attacked verbally, and even physically, and particularly being blamed for the coronavirus pandemic," she said. "So that sort of has limitations on how they can just enjoy their everyday life, and people tend to forget that many of the people who are of Asian appearance in Tasmania have been here for multi generations." While physical abuse is a matter for police investigation, verbal discrimination based on race can be referred to Equal Opportunity Tasmania for further action.  Elise Archer, the Minister for Justice and Corrections, said penalties could be enforced.  "That type of behaviour is deeply concerning to us as a Government, it's deeply concerning to me as the Attorney-General," she said.  "I have encouraged anyone that has experienced that sort of attack, that's racially motivated, to contact Equal Opportunity Tasmania, where the anti-discrimination commissioner can take on such a complaint." 
Coronavirus restrictions are slowly easing, so when will your gym, cinemas, cafes and campgrounds reopen?
Parts of Australia are slowly beginning to wake up after a coronavirus-induced hibernation, with businesses and activities gradually returning to normal. But that doesn't mean flipping a switch and things going back to the way they were before. The Prime Minister recently announced a three-step framework, detailing how certain industries can start reopening to the public.  But it's up to each state and territory to decide how and when they roll back their restrictions, and which businesses will be allowed to do what. It's also up to each state and territory government whether restrictions return if COVID-19 cases start to rise again. Here's what we know so far about some common activities. Step one of the national three-step frame work doesn't permit any indoor physical activity, including at gyms.  But it does allow up to 10 people to participate in outdoor sport, and some gyms and boot camps have taken advantage of that by offering limited outdoor classes if their location allows. Some states are keener than others to start working off all that extra Uber Eats. Gyms are open in the Northern Territory, but you shouldn't be there for more than two hours (props to you if you're working out longer than that). In Western Australia, up to 20 people can now participate in indoor and outdoor fitness classes as long as there's no shared equipment. Indoor gyms are still closed in New South Wales and Victoria  NSW says outdoor exercise equipment can be used "with caution", while Victoria says don't touch it. Up to 10 people are allowed to join outdoor gyms or bootcamps in Tasmania, the ACT and Queensland.  South Australia has a 10-person limit for outdoor non-contact sports at the moment, and gyms are flagged to reopen on June 8. Step three of the national framework says venues can welcome up to 100 people at a time, so lots of owners are in the process of working out how they're going to implement those limits. One condition of gyms reopening to up to 20 people at a time is that they must adhere to the four square metre rule (so some smaller gyms may have to limit their attendees to even less than 20). Every gym has their own COVID-19 plan, so contact your facility to see how they're implementing it and the conditions of their reopening before you go.  No cinemas yet  but in some places, they're not far off.  The national framework says indoor movie theatres can open for up to 20 people in step two and up to 100 people in step three. Queensland is adopting this part of the plan for stage two of their roadmap, which is expected to begin on June 12, as has South Australia, where cinemas and theatres are to reopen on June 8. Cinemas are set to reopen in the Northern Territory on June 5, and Western Australia has also flagged reopening cinemas with gathering limits as part of their third phase of easing restrictions, which we should hear more about in the next few weeks. There's not a lot of detail available at the moment about what distances people would have to sit apart when cinemas do reopen. Cinemas and theatres in New South Wales are still closed for now, as they are in the ACT, Tasmania and Victoria (but Tasmania has flagged reopening cinemas to up to 20 people from June 15). For now, stick to Netflix (and iView!).  In most states and territories, you can  but the process might be a little different to what we're used to. Up to 20 patrons can sit in cafes and restaurants in Western Australia, but Queensland, Tasmania, the ACT and New South Wales venues are limited to 10 customers at a time for now. Outdoor dining in small groups has resumed in South Australia, as long as everyone is appropriately distanced. Table service is still not allowed in Victoria, but you can get takeaway. Restaurants, cafes, food courts and sports or RSL clubs are open again in the Northern Territory, but as with gyms, they have a two-hour time limit. Some restaurants and cafes require people to have downloaded the COVIDSafe app or to provide their contact details before they can dine at the venue for contact tracing purposes, and because of customer limits, pre-bookings are recommended. Sorry party animals  nightclubs aren't at the top of the list to reopen first in most places. The NT is ready to party though, they're reopening nightclubs, concert halls, dance halls and bars on June 5. Queensland has listed nightclubs as one of the venues that can have up to 100 people from July 10, but that's subject to further planning. Nightclubs have also been listed as a "future step for consideration" in South Australia, but there's no date on that for now. The national framework recommends nightclubs don't open until the third stage of the three-step plan  but when they do, they can have up to 100 people. It also recommends that places like brothels and strip clubs stay closed until further notice. Not in Victoria, there's still a ban on camping in national parks there. Camping in a state park or campground is still prohibited in Tasmania too, but is flagged in their second stage of easing restrictions that starts on June 15, and campgrounds in the ACT are also closed. Campgrounds and caravan parks remain closed in NSW, unless you work or permanently live there.  Queenslanders are only allowed to go on day trips at the moment, but from June 12 camping in national and state parks will be back on, and people can travel up to 250km from home to do it. But in South Australia, regional travel is allowed again and campgrounds and caravan parks are allowed to reopen, again with all the necessary social distancing.  Camping is also permitted in Western Australia in accordance with travel restrictions  there are still some intrastate borders in place in WA, and campers must observe the 10-person gathering limit. Similarly in the Northern Territory, you can camp but you can't enter restricted biosecurity zones, so it's best to check what parks are open and the activities you can do there before you go. Organised training is allowed for sports teams in the Northern Territory, and playing team sports is expected to be allowed from June 5. In Western Australia you can play non-contact sport with up to 20 people (some contact sport is expected return in their next phase).  Right now in Queensland up to 10 people can play non-contact sport outdoors, but from June 12, up to 20 people can gather for "non-contact indoor and outdoor community sport".  Outdoor sports training is allowed in South Australia for up to 10 people, and competitive sport is flagged to resume from June 8, including indoor sport.  The ACT is allowing up to 10 people to participate in social sport, as long as it's non-contact and outdoors, and up to 10 people can do non-contact training in Tasmania too. In Victoria, sport can resume if it's outside, non-competitive, everyone stays at least 1.5 metres apart and there's no more than ten people in a group  so if you can't modify your sport so there's no contact, it's not allowed. New South Wales also says people must stay 1.5 metres apart outdoors, and no more than 10 people can gather.  Depends how long your list of loved ones is. Restrictions limiting attendance at weddings and funerals have been particularly tough, but these are slowly starting to relax in most states and territories.  The Northern Territory doesn't specify a limit on outdoor weddings, and in Queensland the current 10-person limit is set to increase to 20 from June 12 and up to 100 from July 10. Western Australian weddings can have up to 20 people inside or 30 people outside. Ten guests can also attend a wedding in New South Wales right now, not including the couple, celebrant and photographer. Victoria has a similar rule  10 guests plus the couple and celebrant  same in Tasmania. The ACT also has a 10-person rule for weddings  there, it includes the couple, but doesn't include the celebrant and photographer. South Australia also includes the couple in their 10-person limit, but not a celebrant or "necessary staff".  There's various social distancing and hygiene conditions to holding weddings no matter where you are, so check with your venue first. If you have guests who are interstate, don't forget some states and territories still have strict border restrictions in place. Guests may be forced to quarantine after crossing the border, or if they don't have the appropriate exemptions they may not be allowed to cross at all.  Or basketball practice, or swimming lessons, or orchestra It all depends where they do their extracurricular activities, and how many people are in the group. In Queensland, for example, from June 12, up to 20 people will be allowed at pools, community sports clubs, theatres, auditoriums, health clubs and yoga studios. The Northern Territory has already opened studios again for dance classes and organised training for sports teams is back on too. Outdoor sports training can go ahead in South Australia in small groups, and community halls and clubrooms can open, but they have to keep any indoor sporting facilities closed. But in New South Wales dance halls are still closed, as are all indoor recreation facilities and indoor public pools. The ACT allows small groups to play and train for social sport and for swimming lessons to take place, but all indoor and outdoor gatherings can have a maximum of 10 people including children. In Victoria, small group lessons at places like community centres "cannot resume at this time" and contact sport is off the table  but from Monday, new protocols will allow for some gathering-limited, socially distanced AFL and netball training to resume. Tasmania says any indoor venue used for sport and recreation can't open or operate, including those used for dance, cheer and gymnastics, but non-contact sports training is allowed in groups of 10. In Western Australia up to 20 people can partake in fitness and non-contact sports, swim in public pools or gather at community facilities. Overseas travel still isn't on the cards to be resuming anytime soon. We've heard estimates about overseas travel not returning before 2021, and even that air travel might not fully go back to normal until 2023. But for now, all overseas travel is currently banned and exceptions to the rule are few and far between. There's a chance we could be able to visit New Zealand before international borders completely reopen, but there's no guarantees on that right now.  That dream overseas holiday will have to wait a little while longer. Every state and territory is rolling back their restrictions differently. Within that, each business is coming up with their own plans to meet requirements based on their particular location, facilities, staff and style of operation. National Cabinet is reviewing the progress of easing restrictions regularly, as are state and territory governments, so there is a chance that restrictions could remain in place or even be brought back if safety is at risk. If you're not sure about something, check your state or territory government's website or contact the business directly to ask how they're doing things. 
Donald Trump replaces Mick Mulvaney as White House chief of staff, taps Mark Meadows
US President Donald Trump has parted ways with acting White House chief of staff Mick Mulvaney and replaced him with conservative congressman and close ally Mark Meadows. Mr Meadows takes over as the White House deals with the unfolding coronavirus crisis and as Mr Trump prepares for a re-election contest in November. He becomes the fourth chief of staff in Mr Trump's three years in office, tasked with attempting to bring order to a chaotic presidency. Mr Meadows is a member of the US House of Representatives from North Carolina and was a combative defender of the President during the impeachment saga, so much so that Mr Trump singled him out for praise after the Republican-led Senate acquitted the President. "He's a tremendously talented man, not just as a politician. As a human being, he's incredible," Mr Trump said at the time. Mr Trump named Mr Mulvaney to be his special US envoy to Northern Ireland amid preparations to welcome Irish Prime Minister Leo Varadkar to Washington for St Patrick's Day ceremonies later this month. A former senior administration official said the change had been a long time in the works and was a "done deal" some time ago. Mr Trump announced the move just after arriving at his Mar-a-Lago Club in Palm Beach, Florida, where he is spending the weekend. Mr Trump had long groused about Mr Mulvaney, who angered the President last year by saying at a White House news conference that Mr Trump had sought to persuade Ukraine to investigate Democratic rival Joe Biden by withholding US aid to Ukraine. What Mr Mulvaney said ran counter to Mr Trump's argument  that there was no "quid pro quo" with Ukraine. Mr Mulvaney quickly walked back the statement, but the damage was done. Mr Mulvaney, a conservative former South Carolina politician, did last more than a year as acting chief of staff after replacing retired General John Kelly, who had succeeded Reince Priebus in the job. He was named acting chief of staff in December 2018 and Mr Trump never made the appointment permanent. A source familiar with the situation said both Mr Mulvaney and Mr Meadows flew aboard Air Force One with Mr Trump to North Carolina on Monday and there was little warmth between the two men. There's no shame in being confused by the system. Plenty of Americans are, too. Mr Trump did not speak to Mr Mulvaney, the source said. Mr Meadows announced in December he would not run for re-election this year. "This was the most orchestrated personnel change so far. Since the Northern Ireland deal was announced at the same time, this was clearly a mutual decision," Sean Spicer, Mr Trump's former White House press secretary, said. Mr Spicer said Mr Meadows had a clear understanding of Mr Trump's style and agenda. ABC/Reuters 
Under financial pressure and slipping into conspiracies, why Instagram influencers promote coronavirus lockdown protests
Former Married at First Sight contestant and Instagram influencer Amanda Micallef has spread COVID-19 misinformation online, but experts say this kind of behaviour and susceptibility to conspiracy theories give us an insight into what can happen to human thinking "under crisis conditions". Recently, she shared a video of another former reality TV contestant speculating that the coronavirus was a ruse to get rid of physical money and added her own caption. "I wholeheartedly believe that the Corona Virus [sic] is the beginning of world control," she wrote. A few weeks ago, fed up with being locked down, Ms Micallef visited an anti-5G Facebook group and advocated for an anti-lockdown protest. The protest never happened, after Victoria Police visited her and warned her against organising the event. But despite the warning from authorities, Ms Micallef remains extremely sceptical of coronavirus lockdowns. "Health precautions my arse, I don't believe in it, I never have and I don't think I ever will," she said. Several social media figures in Australia have gone from posting recipes and workouts to posting wild claims about coronavirus, including chef Pete Evans who was fined $25,000 by Therapeutic Goods Administration last month over misleading claims relating to a light machine called a BioCharger. Ms Micallef said the initial urge to encourage people to ignore lockdown restrictions came from a place of frustration. "Being locked down, having my business and my income heavily impacted and then having more time on my hands to go and research the rabbit holes a little bit further," she said. "What people need to understand is regardless of me being a public figure or not, I too am a human being [and] am heavily impacted financially by this whole lockdown." University of Melbourne social anthropologist James Rose said people were more likely to take up conspiracy theories during stressful conditions, such as those presenting themselves in the pandemic. "What happens under crisis conditions is that people who would otherwise have healthy patterns of thinking, begin to find themselves drawn towards conspiratorial patterns of thinking," he said. "It's because their existing idea systems have begun to break down under pressure and are no longer sufficient to explain what's going on around them. "To explain why they've lost their job, why they're experiencing stress and why daily life has become so unpredictable." Dr Rose said social media  and the power it gives to people to broadcast their views  plays a part in disseminating misinformation. "The only requirement for fringe ideas to become popular is the number of followers that a proponent of that idea has," he said. "In the case of this conspiracy theory linking 5G communications to coronavirus, what we see is at least in relation to the Melbourne protests, the organiser was a contestant on a TV cooking show. "As a consequence of that, they had a large number of followers, so when this person slipped into a conspiratorial way of thinking, all of their followers were exposed to it." Dr Rose is referencing former cooking show contestant Fanos Panayides, who was arrested at last week's anti-lockdown protests. This week Mr Panayides has encouraged Australians tosmash their TVsin defiance of the mainstream media. Around the country, some people have reported that friends they would not expect to believe conspiracy theories, have started to believe them. Lee*, who wished to remain anonymous, said she had seen an increase in friends posting conspiracy theory-related content online since the lockdowns began. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "Definitely people I would not normally see posting things about conspiracy theories," she said. "That's what's surprised me the most  especially conspiracy theories around medical things." When she posted an article refuting some of the claims being made by her friends she was inundated by friends chastising her. "I had a lot of people commenting, a lot of friends commenting back to me, telling me I needed to wake up and do my research and telling me that they'd gone deep and they'd found information about it," she said. Dr Rose said the rise of views that were once considered fringe could be viewed as maladaptive coping strategies to rising incidences of poor mental health. "There is always some degree of conspiratorial thinking in a national population, normally it only affects a small number of people, who may have other underlying mental health conditions or they may be subject to other protracted or acute stressors because of personal circumstances," he said. "That's because their existing idea systems have begun to break down under pressure, they're no longer sufficient to explain what's going on around them." *name has been changed to protect their identity. 
Australia-China trade stoush over coronavirus inquiry puts exports  and more at risk
Exports from four major beef facilities have been suspended, barley has been threatened with tariffs of 80 per cent and wine producers are worried they will not be able to sell their top drops. China's apparent displeasure at Prime Minister Scott Morrison's calls for an inquiry into the origin of COVID-19 is ramping up and it's feared many more industries could be at risk, adding to the pressure from the coronavirus economic slowdown. Here is a rundown of what's happening in China-Australia trade relations. China is by far Australia's biggest export market, taking about 30 per cent of Australia's exports by value. According to recent Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade figures, China takes $79.5 billion worth of Australian iron ore, $13.8 billion worth of coal and $16 billion in natural gas exports. In 2017-18 Australia exported $123.3 billion in goods and services to China, equal to about 6.7 per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The Chinese steel mills are engineered to take particular blends of ore that Australia supplies making it unlikely China would shift away to other suppliers, but the flow of Chinese students and tourists to our shores is under threat, as are exports of primary produce and consumer goods. There are over 12,000 Australian exporters selling goods to China either directly or via Hong Kong and over 3,000 Australian businesses based there. Australia's top trading partners: China also imports $2.67 billion in Australian beef, just slightly more than Japan. In fact, Japan does pip China for the slice of our resources in the coal and natural gas sectors as well, but again, not by a huge margin. Coal is the biggest where Japan's $17.05 billion of Australian coal imports is $3 billion more than China's. But both countries are way ahead of the next market, India, at just $10.61 billion. Australia's top goods exports: Biggest trading partners by top export: Iron ore Coal Natural gas Gold Beef Any sanctions or tariff hikes on Australian products will likely hit our grain, wine, dairy and seafood sectors which rely heavily on China as well. Chinese authorities have so far ignored attempts by the Morrison Government to reach out and discuss trade tensions. Trade Minister Simon Birmingham confirmed his Chinese counterpart Zhong Shan had not responded to his requests for a meeting. Prime Minister Scott Morrison described the current situation as "obviously a difficult time". He also said Australia "will always do the right thing when it comes to respecting other countries' laws". "We always respect the sovereignty of other nations and we simply expect the same in return and I think thats a pretty fair deal," he said. Although Australia would suffer some pretty severe economic fallout if China pulled the plug, UNSW Business School economics fellow and lecturer Tim Harcourt reckons our strong relationship with other Asian countries will see us through. "We're not alone. Most countries have been engaging heavily with China because it's the story of the Asian century, over 10 per cent growth [per annum] over 20 years, why wouldn't you?" Mr Harcourt said. "The difficulty with China you get a mix of geopolitics with commercial decisions. "With barley, Australia provides a fifth of China's barley  Any dispute around that has probably been around for about 18 months and China has chosen the corona spat to go in hard. "This talk of barley and beef, it's really just going to hurt China. "China has got great issues with energy security and food security. China would be aware Australia can shift over to Japan and South Korea pretty quickly. "China has got a billion people that need energy, food, quality education for their children." It might seem like the PM's enthusiasm for an inquiry into the origin of coronavirus  widely believed to be in the Chinese city of Wuhan  has prompted this retaliation, but this has all happened before. In any case, Mr Morrison is not giving up, saying Australia would always "stand our ground when it comes to the things we believe in" and "reach out to the rest of the world and seek to deal with it fairly, honestly and openly". UNSW Law's China International Business and Economic Law Centre co-director Professor Heng Wang said countries like Korea, Japan, Norway and Canada have all copped some kind of animosity from China. And France has been on the receiving end, too, of late. "It's not uncommon and the solution almost always depends on time and the relationship between the countries, and in most cases, it's hard to address in a short time," he said. "A more constructive way is to use the RCEP  Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership  the only one China is involved in. It's a regional free trade agreement among 16 countries that will deliver substantial new trade and investment opportunities for Australia in the Indo-Pacific region. "[These sorts of trade stoushes are] increasingly common if you don't have a trade-based agreement." China's Ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingyer described Mr Morrison's global coronavirus inquiry as "dangerous" and undermining of the global fight against the pandemic. He warned Chinese people might have second thoughts about trips to Australia and parents might not want to send their children to a hostile country. After banning imports from four Australian abattoirs, Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said China Customs detected repeated violations of inspection and quarantine requirements agreed by Chinese and Australian authorities. "To safeguard Chinese consumers' health and safety, China has decided to suspend effectively immediately, processing four Australian companies' import declarations for meat products," he said. "The relevant Australian department has been informed of this decision. "The Chinese side has asked the Australian side to conduct a thorough investigation to find the cause and address the issue. You may get more specifics from the competent Chinese authorities." All this sparks the question of why we are so concerned about one country refusing our produce. Mr Harcourt said there is a bit more work to do in diversification of our export markets, but it's not all doom and gloom, and we haven't put all our beef and barley into one paddock. "We have developed reasonable alternative markets  we have reasonable trade with South Korea, we're best of mates with Japan," he said. "For Australia it's been the engagement with Asia, not just China  the power of proximity, not the tyranny of distance. "I think there's a bit of diplomacy to do and a bit of diversification. [Trade Minister] Simon Birmingham is a level-headed smart guy and he will work through the usual channels commercially. "The beef industry will start again. There's some technical issues they'll get over. The beef producers have been quite measured. The average Chinese consumer loves Aussie beef, so do the Japanese and the Koreans. It's a quality product. "And, when you think about the nuts and blots of this, I would have thought the beneficiaries of a call for an inquiry into how a pandemic started would be the Chinese people, given how many people were harmed in Wuhan." 
Kids in East Africa are having their hair done to resemble coronavirus to raise awareness
The coronavirus has revived a hairstyle in East Africa, one with braided spikes that echo the virus' distinctive shape. The style's growing popularity is in part due to economic hardships linked to virus restrictions. It is cheap, mothers say, and helps with the goal of spreading awareness that the coronavirus is real. The hairstyle had gone out of fashion in recent years, as imported real and synthetic hair from India, China and Brazil began to flood the market and demand by local women increased. Pictures of the flowing or braided imported styles are tacked up in beauty salons across much of Africa. But now, in a makeshift salon beside a busy road in Kibera  a slum in the heart of the Kenyan capital Nairobi  24-year-old hairdresser Sharon Refa braids young girls' hair into the antennae-like spikes that people call the "coronavirus hairstyle". Girls shift in the plastic chairs as she tugs at their scalps. "Some grown-ups don't believe that the coronavirus is real, but then most young children appear keen to sanitise their hands and wear masks," Ms Refa said. "So many adults do not do this, and that is why we came up with the corona hairstyle." Kenya's number of confirmed virus cases was nearing 700 as of Monday. With the widespread shortage of testing materials, however, the real number of cases could be higher. Health officials are especially worried about the possible spread of the virus in crowded slums. Mothers like Margaret Andeya, who is struggling to make ends meet, said the coronavirus hairstyle suits her daughters' styling needs and her pocket. Virus-related restrictions have stifled the daily work for millions of people with little or no savings. "This hairstyle is much more affordable for people like me who cannot afford to pay for the more expensive hairstyles out there and yet we want our kids to look stylish," Ms Andeya said. It costs 50 shillings, or about 70 cents, to get the braids, while the average hairdo costs between $4.30 and $7.25. That's money most people in Kibera cannot afford at the moment. The technique used in braiding the coronavirus hairstyle is threading, which uses yarn instead of synthetic hair braids. This is the secret to making it affordable, residents said. "COVID-19 has destroyed the economy, taken our jobs from us, and now money is scarce," 26-year-old Mariam Rashid said. "I therefore decided to have my child's hair done up like this at an affordable 50 shillings, and she looks good. "The hairstyle also helps in communicating with the public about the virus." ABC/AP 
How coronavirus restrictions have given us a new spin on language
People love creating words  in times of crisis it's a "sick" (in the good sense) way of pulling through. From childhood, our "linguistic life has been one willingly given over to language play" (in the words of David Crystal). In fact, scientists have recently found learning new words can stimulate exactly those same pleasure circuits in our brain as sex, gambling, drugs and eating (the pleasure-associated region called the ventral striatum). We're leximaniacs at heart and, while the behaviour can occasionally seem dark, we can learn a thing or two by reflecting on those playful coinages that get us through "dicky" times. In the past, hard times birthed playful rhymes. The 1930s Depression gave us playful reduplications based on Australian landmarks and towns  "ain't no work in Bourke"; "everything's wrong at Wollongong"; "things are crook at Tallarook". Wherever we're facing the possibility of being "dicky" or "Tom [and] Dick" (rhyming slang for "sick"), we take comfort in language play.  It's one thing to feel "crook", but it's another thing again to feel as "crook as Rookwood" (a cemetery in Sydney) or to have a "wog" (synonymous with "bug", likely from "pollywog", and unrelated to the Italian/Greek "wog"). Remedies may be found in language's abilities to translate sores into plasters, to paraphrase William Gouge's 1631 sermon on the plague. New slang enables us to face our fears head-on  just as when the Parisians began calling a late-18th century influenza "la grippe" to reflect the "seizing" effect it had on people. The word was subsequently taken up in British and American English. In these times of COVID-19, there are the usual suspects: shortenings like "sanny" (hand sanitiser) and "iso" (isolation), abbreviations like BCV (before corona virus) and WFH (working from home), also compounds "corona moaner" (the whingers) and "zoombombing" (the intrusion into a video conference). Plenty of nouns have been "verbed" too  the toilet paper/pasta/tinned tomatoes have been "magpied". Even rhyming slang has made a bit of a comeback with Miley Cyrus lending her name to the virus (already end-clipped to "the Miley"). Some combine more than one process  "the isodesk" (or is that "the isobar") is where many of us are currently spending our days. What is interesting about COVID-lingo is the large number of creations that are blended expressions formed by combining two existing words.  The new portmanteau then incorporates meaningful characteristics from both. Newly spawned "coronials" (corona + millennials) has the predicted baby boom in late 2020 already covered. "Blursday" has been around since at least 2007 but originally described the day spent hung over  it's now been pressed into service because no-one knows what day of the week it is anymore. The official disease name itself, "COVID", is somewhere between a blend and an acronym because it takes in vowels to make the abbreviation pronounceable (CO from corona, VI from virus and D from disease). True, we've been doing this sort of thing for centuries  "flush" (flash + gush) dates from the 1500s. But it's never been a terribly significant method of coinage.  John Algeo's study of neologisms over a 50-year period (194191) showed blends counting for only 5 per cent of the new words.  Tony Thorne's impressive collection of more than 100 COVID-related terms has around 34 per cent blends, and the figure increases to more than 40 per cent if we consider only slang. Not only have blends become much more common, the nature of the mixing process has changed too. Rather than combining splinters of words, as in "coronials", most of these corona-inspired mixes combine full words merged with parts of others. The "quarantini" keeps the word "quarantine" intact and follows it with just a hint of "martini" (and for that extra boost to the immune system you can rim the glass with vitamin C powder). Many of these have bubbled up over the past few weeks  "lexit" or "covexit" (the strategies around exiting lockdown and economic hardship), "coronacation" (working from home) and so on. Humour emerges as a prevailing feature of these blends, even more so when the overlap is total.  Words like 'iso' and 'quazzie' could be helping Australians cope with coronavirus. In "covidiot" (the one who ignores public health advice and probably hoards toilet paper), both "covid" and "idiot" remain intact. There's been a flourishing of these types of blend  "covideo party", "coronapocalypse", "covidivorce" to name just a few. Clearly, there is a fair bit of dark comedy in the jokes and memes that abound on the internet, and in many of these coinages too  compounds like "coronacoma" (for the period of shutdown, or that deliciously long quarantine sleep) and "boomer remover" (used by younger generations for the devastation of the baby boomer demographic). Callous, heartless, yes. But humour is often used as a means of coming to terms with the less happy aspects of our existence. People use the levity as a way of disarming anxiety and discomfort by downgrading what it is they cannot cope with. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Certainly, gallows humour has always featured large in hospital slang (diagnoses like GOK "God only knows" and PFO "pissed and fell over"). For those who have to deal with dying and death every day, it is perhaps the only way to stay sane. COVID challenges us all to confront the biological limits of our own bodies  and these days humour provides the much-needed societal safety valve. So what will come of these creations? The vast majority will fall victim to "verbicide", as slang expressions always do. Kate Burridge is Professor of linguistics at Monash University and Howard Manns is a lecturer in linguistics at Monash University. The pair wrote this piece for The Conversation, where it was originally published. 
Being a paramedic during the coronavirus crisis  when disappearing isn't an option
To survive in the unpredictable world of stabbings, shootings, road accidents and drug and alcohol violence, paramedics develop a nose for danger. Our instinct and priority is to shield ourselves from it first. Running into a burning building might seem heroic, but you can't help a soul when you're dead. When I picked up my first suspected case of COVID-19 four weeks ago, I felt like the canary in the coalmine. Our patient was in his late 60s, a former sailor with a missing leg. We knew it was serious. Sailors don't often call ambulances  especially Moby Dick kind of sailors  unless they're really dying. What's a mere flu after wrestling whales? After hearing his coughing and spluttering from the door, we returned to the ambulance and put on our personal protective equipment (PPE). It felt like a pivotal moment  one I wasn't too comfortable with. It made me think of my escape plan. Back in 2003, I'd done a training course for chemical, biological and radioactive emergencies. Learning about the effects of nerve agents on the human body was alarming. Stuck in my head to this day is the mnemonic SLUDGE: salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, gastric emptying, emesis  basically, leaking from every orifice. It's no wonder my classmates and I had second thoughts. We decided to keep Aloha shirts, emblazoned with palm trees and sunsets, in our ambulances just in case an incident like this actually happened. Then, we could put them on and walk away from the ambulance, disappear into the crowd  vanish for our own survival. It's wasn't cowardly, just sensible. Remember DR ABC from your first aid course? Danger  remove the danger, or yourself from danger. The night we picked up the sailor, I thought of my Aloha shirt, and wondered if this was the moment to put it on. For a second the idea made me smile, but of course it was a fantasy. Running away was never a serious option.  Radio National Fictions is the ABC's place for creative audio fiction. We deal in the hilarious, the gritty and sometimes the dystopian. Think of it as movies for your ears. Instead I would do what most paramedics were doing: curse quietly, protect myself as best I could, then go join the battle. A month on, emergencies like car accidents and sporting injuries are down, because people are cocooned in isolation. We respond along empty highways reclaimed by insects. When we arrive at a house with a suspected COVID-19 case, we don our masks and gloves, goggles and gowns. It takes time. The curtains of neighbouring houses twitch. Fearful eyes stare down. But we can't rush our work. There's a system we follow: the order of PPE application and removal, how we dispose of face-shields and garments, the meticulous cleaning of ourselves and our vehicles. But no matter the care we take or how disciplined we are with wiping down, some people out there see us as lepers.  At the height of the coronavirus outbreak, we followed the city's paramedics into the homes of the sick and dying. No wonder our usual workload of anxious people has dropped. To many we are now the ones they fear the most, thinking we carry the virus. They give us the widest berth in the mall and cross the street to avoid us. Last week, a customer at a supermarket called a paramedic friend of mine a "spreader". When my work partner says she's hungry and wants to stop by Woollies in the ambulance I offer to go in for her. "I have my shirt," I tell her. "My Aloha shirt." But she's not convinced. "Who wears Hawaiian shirts over blue uniform trousers with reflective stripes?" she replies, shaking her head. "No point going undercover unless you do it right." My initial anxieties have begun to settle. The Australian coronavirus disaster hasn't materialised, at least not so far. I heard a man outside my coffee shop call it a "fizzer". The sailor we picked up on our first night tested negative, as have most of those I've treated. So far only one paramedic in the country has been infected. We've played our cards right and we're winning the game  though it won't take much for things to go south if we get cocky about it. After work I take my uniform off at the ambulance station and leave my boots in my locker. My wife doesn't like me hugging the children or touching anything at all without a shower. Even then, when I try and kiss her on the lips she turns her head and gives me her cheek. "Sorry! Corona!" she says, cheerfully as she can. It could just be an excuse to avoid my kisses, but if it's fear, I understand. Just as I'm protecting myself from patients, she's protecting herself from me. D for danger, I know.  Maybe it will end up being the lack of kisses, rather than coronavirus, that compels me to put on my Aloha shirt and walk into the sunset. Benjamin Gilmour is a paramedic and author. His most recent book is The Gap. Get more stories that go beyond the news cycle with our weekly newsletter. 
Queensland roadside campers use vines, sticks and rope to quarantine during coronavirus pandemic
While the country faces its most serious health crisis in living memory, 62-year-old Steve Johnstone uses a thin piece of rope around a dusty ute to quarantine himself. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Each morning he washes in the ocean, sits down with a first aid kit and checks his temperature to reassure himself he does not have coronavirus.  "We have nowhere else to go," Mr Johnstone said.  The Far North Queensland man is one of about 15 people living in cars and tents at a campsite between Ellis Beach and the Captain Cook Highway, 30 kilometres north of Cairns. With most other campgrounds and caravan parks in the region closed due to COVID-19, the spot has become a temporary haven for pensioners, homeless people and backpackers during the pandemic.  Dead branches and tree vines have been used to section off sites so the occupants can comply with social distancing rules, in the hope they will not be forced to move on.  "I don't have a home to quarantine so I've made this my home until I can find accommodation," Mr Johnstone said.  Unemployed and living off a disability pension, Mr Johnstone said he could not afford accommodation options offered to him by the Queensland Housing Department and other homeless support services in the area.  "The only other place I can probably go to is a deserted house and squat in it, which I don't want to do.  With no toilets or showers at the campsite he was also concerned about the health and safety of occupants but said this was his lifestyle until the pandemic passed. "I'm pretty sure they can open up some caravan parks or the Cairns Showgrounds for people like us. "It's not really possible for us to quarantine if people are coming and going.  "If you get corona your cards are definitely up, especially when you're my age." But others at the site said they had chosen to settle there and believed it was the safest option during the pandemic.  German backpacker Jannik Zintarra has been camping at the site for two weeks.  "At the beginning we were in a hostel, but there were way too many people for us so we decided to go to a camp ground.  "So many [other campgrounds] are closed so we ended up here.  "We could do Airbnb but that's very expensive and we're trying to save money because we just can't find a job at the moment."  Mr Zintarra said they were trying to help each other out, making trips to the nearest town to buy food and essential items for elderly campers.  Members of the Ellis Beach and Buchans Point community have raised concerns about the campground with Queensland Police Service (QPS) and the Transport Department.   A police spokesperson said officers were aware of the situation, but some of the campers had nowhere else to go.  "We won't be taking any action against them especially in the current climate," the spokesperson said.  "They're doing really a pretty good job with what they've got.  "Whilst they're there and doing the right thing, at least we know they're not moving around and spreading the virus."  The Cairns Regional Council said it had received 29 complaints relating to illegal camping in the past three weeks and 11 resulted in move-on requests.  "Council is taking an educational and flexible approach to those people, such as grey nomads and travelling backpackers, who may have found themselves without a place to stay as a result of coronavirus restrictions," a spokesman said.  The Queensland Transport Department said it was working closely with the QPS and Cairns Regional Council to determine the best approach to managing camping in roadside areas. A spokesperson said the situation at Ellis Beach would be monitored and enforcement action would be carried out if necessary.  On March 26, the Queensland Government announced $24.7 million to help specialist homelessness services provide immediate housing support to vulnerable residents during the COVID-19 crisis, but the amount distributed in Far North Queensland was unclear.   The ABC has contacted homelessness services including Mission Australia and Anglicare but has not received a response.  
Hundreds die in Iran over false belief drinking methanol cures coronavirus
Health workers in Iran are warning people to not fall for coronavirus hoaxes, after 700 people died from alcohol poisoning amid claims drinking bootleg liquor can keep the virus at bay. A report released by the Iranian Government earlier this month showed alcohol poisoning over a two-month period was 10 times the number of cases during the whole of 2019, likely spurred by the COVID-19 epidemic. The national coroner's authority said alcohol poisoning killed 728 Iranians between February 20 and April 7. Last year there were only 66 deaths from alcohol poisoning, according to the report. "People think that alcohol causes immunity to corona, while drinking alcohol does not eliminate corona in the body," a medical expert recently told the Government-aligned Tasnim News Agency.  "This misconception has caused even children to drink alcohol  which can lead to death and blindness." Along with Turkey, Iran is facing one of the worst coronavirus outbreaks in the Middle East with 5,806 deaths and more than 91,000 confirmed cases. Iranian health ministry spokesman Kianoush Jahanpour said 525 people had died from swallowing toxic methanol alcohol since February 20, according to local state TV. He said a total of 5,011 people had been poisoned from methanol alcohol, adding that about 90 people had lost their eyesight or were suffering eye damage from the alcohol poisoning. Fake remedies have spread across social media in Iran, where people remain deeply suspicious of the Government after it downplayed the crisis before it overwhelmed the country. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. The Iranian Government mandates that manufacturers of toxic methanol add an artificial colour to their products so the public can tell it apart from ethanol, the kind of alcohol that can be used in cleaning wounds. Ethanol is also the kind of alcohol found in alcoholic beverages, though its production is illegal in Iran, where consumption of alcohol is prohibited under strict Islamic law. Minority Christians, Jews and Zoroastrians may drink alcoholic drinks in private, however, and there is a bootleg industry. Some bootleggers in Iran use methanol, adding a splash of bleach to mask the added colour before selling it as drinkable. Sometimes it is mixed with consumable alcohol to stretch supply, other times it comes as methanol, falsely advertised as drinkable. Methanol also can contaminate traditionally fermented alcohol. Methanol poisoning causes delayed organ and brain damage and can cause symptoms like chest pain, hyperventilation, blindness and inducing a coma. "Other countries have only one problem, which is the new coronavirus pandemic. But we are fighting on two fronts here," said Dr Hossein Hassanian, an adviser to Iran's Health Ministry.  "We have to both cure the people with alcohol poisoning and also fight the coronavirus." In response to the coronavirus outbreak, Iran's Government announced it would allow an increase in the production of alcohol for medical purposes. The country currently has more than 40 alcohol-producing factories that have been allocated to pharmaceutical companies and the sanitising of items. Even before the outbreak, the Iranian economy was struggling under severe US sanctions, blocking the sale of its crude oil abroad and limiting medical supplies. On Thursday, US President Donald Trump came under fire for suggesting the possibility of injecting disinfectant to cure coronavirus, causing an international uproar with government agencies rushing to put out warnings against consuming disinfectants like bleach. ABC/AP 
Country postie delivers smile and some love to Tasmania's coronavirus hotspot
On her country mail run Jocelyn Flint delivers letters, boxes of wine, flat pack queen-size beds, asthma puffers, and even biscuits for morning tea. With about 5,000 people in quarantine in Tasmania's North West, there's a strict stay-at-home order for everyone in the region and Ms Flint is a welcome sight as she does her rounds. "I've been getting quite a few thankyous the past couple of days," Ms Flint said. Cheryl Willie lives with her husband on the Redpa dairy farm run by her son, Rohan. They've got 300 Friesian cows on prime, lush green dairying country. She loves catching up with Ms Flint, especially at the moment. "We couldn't do without her  because she's the only person we're seeing in isolation," Ms Willie said. Ms Willie is one of about 300 farms and households on Ms Flint's postal route on the north-west tip of Tasmania. "It's always good to see the mail lady, as we call her," Mr Willie said. Even more so now that the north west of Tasmania is in lockdown due to a COVID-19 outbreak. "A lot of people rely on her pretty much," Mr Willie said. Ms Flint is delivering all kinds of things and often a bit extra. "I'm doing a lot more deliveries at the moment, people aren't leaving home and they're ringing me and I'm picking up stuff for them," she said. Nothing is too big or too small for this country postie, but sometimes it is a squeeze getting stuff into the back of her small four-wheel drive. Yesterday it was a flat pack queen-size bed, the other day a flat screen tv, some medication for cows, and an asthma puffer. Since the coronavirus outbreak, it is taking her longer to do the run  but it's not just because of the increase in parcels. "I'm always having a yack, got to catch up, and I'm full of news. I can tell them what's going on around the place. I know everything," Ms Flint said. It's pretty social and she gets plenty of laughs along the way. Farmers in this country put a bit of effort into the designs of their letterboxes. One farmer on the route built a letterbox in the shape of an army tank. Often this postie will go to extra lengths to deliver to her clients, dropping things off at the door rather than the roadside post box. Sometimes the requests are a bit cheeky, like the one for a packet of biscuits for a famer's morning tea. "When I got to the mailbox, there was an envelope in there and there were cow muck fingerprints all over it and a lot of five-cent coins," Ms Flint said. In her spare time, Ms Flint is a horsewoman. She's part of a posse of local stockmen and women who volunteer to move cattle from Robbins Island to mainland Tasmania. It's an 11-kilometre route that she knows well and it sees the cattle and drovers winding their way between pooling seawater and a rushing incoming tide. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "You never get over the scenery, it's beautiful. It's just so different every time," she said. A knee operation forced her out of the saddle recently and she missed the last muster. "I'll be on the horse soon," she said. In the meantime this stockwoman and country postie is playing a big part in keeping North West Tassie people happy in trying times. 
Wheatbelt businesses benefit from regional COVID-19 travel restrictions as more people buy local
Despite restrictions on local businesses and COVID-19 travel restrictions, some Wheatbelt businesses are stronger than before because of local support. In Northam, about 100 kilometres east of Perth, many businesses did better during the strictest period of Western Australia's regional border closures, according to Northam Chamber of Commerce CEO, Esther Bliss. "There's been a lot of businesses in town that have done very well because people aren't going down the hill and have been able to buy local," she said. "Something we have been screaming at them [about] for years, the businesses have seen a great number of people who have never been in their stores before, coming in." Avon Valley Contractors is a stock feed, garden and bike shop that has been operating in Northam for four years. Owner Enrika Grogan said April was their best month of business ever. "April was up 22 per cent so that would be a massive profit margin for us  that is huge," she said. "Normally 6 to 7 per cent  that's kind of where you're tracking." The business diversified into a bike shop by chance last year and Ms Grogan said they had been so busy they had to employ another staff member in the midst of the pandemic. "We've kind of been continually adding to the business because when you're in a country town or community you kind of have to be ready to pivot very easily, you can't stay doing the same thing," she said. "Everyone in town is feeling that and anyone that maybe would have lost business to Perth has gained people who may have travelled down the hill." At Lucy's Cafe on the main street of Northam, owner Jess Joy said when COVID-19 restrictions were first introduced, they had to diversify their business by making ready-to-go meals. She said their loyal customer base meant they were able to survive. "Our customers have been amazing," Ms Joy said. "We might usually have someone get their own lunch but they've encouraged their workplace to get lunch and things like that, so the community has been awesome." Ms Bliss said the pandemic had been a learning curve for regional businesses. "You cannot just rely on things as they always had been, because we are in a time where this has never happened before," she said. "So the lesson learnt is to always continuously be improving your business and always looking at alternative revenue streams and not putting all your eggs in one basket." 
Latrobe Valley patients incorrectly billed for COVID-19 tests from pop-up medical centre 
A pop-up medical centre in the Latrobe Valley has incorrectly charged several of its patients a medical fee for COVID-19 testing. According to the Department of Health and Human Services, testing for the virus is free at public health facilities, mobile testing centres or GP bulk-billing clinics. Pensioner Sandra Dick, from Churchill, received an invoice from the Mid Valley Walk-through testing facility in Morwell, which is operated by Dorevitch Pathology. She said she was billed $91.80 after she was tested for coronavirus. "I received the bill in the mail, and it shocked me a bit because I was under the impression that it was free," Ms Dick said. "When I got the account, I was sort of a bit stunned because the doctor who supposedly referred me and the pathologist  I'd never heard of either of them." Independent State MP for Morwell, Russell Northe, said a number of concerned patients contacted his office about the issue, claiming Dorevitch did not bother to address the matter. "People were supposed to be informed via text or other means that it was a mistake but unfortunately there has been a cohort of people that haven't received that message," he said. "It's just imperative that every single person that was tested at that Mid Valley clinic has subsequently been advised by the authorities that they're not required to pay that bill." A spokesman from Dorevitch said patients were wrongfully billed due to a technical system glitch and a round of text messages have been sent to the patients advising them to disregard the bill. He said patients who do not receive texts will be phoned or a letter will be posted to their address. 
SA's last remaining COVID-19 patient leaves Royal Adelaide Hospital
South Australia's last remaining COVID-19 patient has left the Royal Adelaide Hospital, in what nurses say is a miracle recovery. Paul Faraguna, 68, the first COVID-19 patient to be admitted to intensive care and the last to walk out, was farewelled by staff from the infectious diseases ward with a standing ovation on Thursday afternoon. Mr Faraguna was admitted to hospital just over two months ago, after contracting the coronavirus aboard the Ruby Princess cruise ship. He was admitted to intensive care six days later, suffering organ failure and placed in an induced coma. "The doctors were unable to say what my future would be if I survived, even suggesting that I may have brain damage and be permanently disabled," he said in a statement. The Royal Adelaide Hospital's Nurse Unit Manager, Karen Shutz, said Mr Faraguna's journey was a rollercoaster for him and his family.  "We honestly didn't think he'd make it through, but to see him come out the other side is just the most amazing gift you can have out of this pandemic," Ms Shutz said. "He is one amazing, resilient gentleman, who I don't think I've ever seen him be down at all in the whole time he's been here with us. "It was just such a huge boost that somebody had made it out the other side who was really sick, so yeah, there were a few tears as he was walking out this afternoon." Mr Farugna is now headed for further treatment and rehabilitation at Modbury Hospital. "The only challenge left is to walk normally again, which should, I feel, happen in the near future due to my physiotherapy program," he said. SA Health hasn't recorded any new cases of coronavirus for two-weeks. The total number of COVID-19 cases detected in South Australia remains 439, but there are no longer any known active cases of the disease in South Australia. But SA Health continues to urge people to maintain social distancing and good hand, cough and sneeze hygiene practices. Health authorities also want anyone in SA with even only mild flu-like symptoms  or who have lost the sense of taste or smell  to get tested for COVID-19. 
Retired nurse denied COVID-19 travel exemption to care for dying sister reunited with her at last
Huddled together, tears flowing and words of love being whispered, a reunion between two sisters in a small New South Wales town marks the end of a nearly two-month battle to grant a dying wish. After five travel exemption applications, two weeks of self-isolation in Sydney and two negative results for COVID-19, it's been an arduous journey for Christine Archer to be at the side of her terminally ill sister, Gail Baker. On Wednesday afternoon, the retired New Zealand nurse finally made it to the NSW Mid North Coast village of Bowraville. "Words can't explain how I feel," Ms Archer said.  "I'm just so happy that I finally got to be here and be with her.  "The last two weeks have been the hardest or the longest two weeks of my life I think."  Ms Archer was granted a COVID-19 travel exemption on May 1 to fly from New Zealand to care for her younger sister, who has advanced ovarian cancer. The approval came after four rejections by the Department of Home Affairs.  For Ms Baker, the ordeal was "demoralising", as she faced the possibility of dying alone in hospital without her sister.  Ms Baker's terminal diagnosis had already forced her to give up her decades-long career as a midwife, and the rejections of her sister's application had left her disheartened. But, she said, the approval of the fifth application restored her hope her sister would be able to come to Australia to be with her.  "I didn't have much hope [Christine] would be let into the country, so it was a huge relief," Ms Baker said.  "At the time I honestly didn't think I would last a week or two. I was very ill." As she sat in her living room and reminisced with her older sister over a cuppa, surrounded by her only daughter, grandchildren and dogs, Ms Baker said it was exactly how she wanted to live out her final weeks and months.  "That is my dying wish, and it's why I couldn't wait to get out of the hospital, because I thought I was going to die in there," she said.  "I want to be here with my dogs and my sister and [daughter] Erica, who is a bit frightened of death. She hasn't had much to do with that and I don't want her to be frightened." Ms Baker's daughter, Erica Peterson, said it was a mixture of relief and happiness to see her mother and aunt reunited after what had been a difficult six weeks.  She said hoped that as the pandemic continued no-one else would have to endure a similar experience.  "If somebody is dying or if there is some exceptional circumstance, please let people's families be with them," she said.  "People need to be with their families at horrible times like these." 
Community sports clubs worried refunds and higher operating costs will finish them post COVID-19
Community sports clubs are working on plans to restart seasons after a coronavirus-induced pause, but for some clubs the starting whistle may never ring out again. Clubs and industry bodies are calling for additional support Time was called on community and grassroots sports in March as regulations were introduced to limit the impact of COVID-19. League, union, soccer, netball and hockey, among other team sports, have been on hold ever since. Bundaberg Hockey Association president Des Barritt said revenue was down significantly, with associations, clubs and sponsors fighting to remain viable. "Our revenue from the bar and canteen is what [usually] sort of helps prop us up in meeting our financial commitments for the year, because we've still got rates, insurance, our groundsmen  even though we're not playing we need to maintain the fields.  "We'll be lucky to even get half a season in, so our revenue is going to be well and truly down, because the players don't want to pay for a full season if they are only going to get half. "It's not just a matter of just opening up the gates and we go forward. We've got to implement our COVID safety plan, which is going to take a lot of work and a lot of extra money, as well with sanitising, disinfecting, cleaning." Clubs Queensland, the industry association for community clubs, has valued the annual economic contribution of clubs, including RSLs, at $2.2 billion. Acting CEO Dan Nipperess said the biggest concern stemming from coronavirus shutdowns was the ongoing overhead costs. "Clubs have seen between a 90 and a 95 per cent drop in incomes," he said. "You could be looking at 20 to 25 per cent of community clubs not being able to reopen. About half of the 850 clubs in Queensland are sports clubs." The Australian Sports Foundation has begun surveying clubs to gauge the impact of the pandemic. CEO Patrick Walker said initial responses had painted a worrying picture. "We've got clubs telling us they've lost 80 per cent of their sponsorship because the local pub, club or cafe has closed its doors  clubs that have received their membership regos, spent it, and are now faced with having to refund it, and they don't have the money," he said. "Some have told us they'd be out of business within three months without funding. "The big issue is, we think, when members do get back to competition and training, a lot of people won't be able to afford sport for them or their kids anymore, and there will be a big decline in participation." Heather McLaren, regional president of Marlin Coast Netball in Far North Queensland, said the financial situation for many clubs in the region was also perilous. "Many parents haven't paid their dues at the moment, which is understandable, and many who have paid will want at least a partial refund due to the season being at best truncated, at worst not happening at all," she said. "We're just holding the money and we'll have to refund it if the season doesn't go ahead." Ms McLaren said fees already paid had gone to the managing body in Brisbane and there was uncertainty about whether that money would ever be returned to clubs  further complicating the financial situation. "The fees that we pay to register our players go to the governing body  it covers insurance  and there will have to be some consultation with that state body, and whether we get that money back will be in the lap of the gods, I think," she said. Gladstone Rugby League chairman Richard Duff said the league would survive the pandemic, but not without challenges. "They're all going to survive  the Gladstone council has been proactive having meetings with all sporting groups, and the [Queensland Rugby League] are developing plans to help clubs out of this," he said. "It is going to cost more when we emerge from this, disinfecting the rooms, hand sanitiser, only so many people at games  all of us rely on people coming to junior and senior sport and buying food from the kiosk  so how we are going to generate revenue is going to be the question." Industry bodies have intensified their pleas for government assistance. Australian Sports Foundation CEO Patrick Walker said the body had also been rallying for independent support. "Traditional forms of fundraising have stopped. No sausage sizzles, no club events and dinners, can't do a Friday night meat raffle," he said. "They're being hit from every angle and many will go to the wall. "We do need governments, philanthropy and charities to look at how they can help this part of the community through this troublesome period." In Bundaberg, Des Barritt  who had been planning to host the under-15 men's state championship in September, before it was cancelled  said there was some optimism on the horizon. "Hockey Queensland is hoping to allocate those same championships to the same places again next year, so the areas can hang their hat on having a championship next year and we'll hopefully get some revenue out of that," he said. Queensland's Sports Minister Mick De Brenni has been contacted for comment. 
Family sues cruise company arguing 'they didn't pay enough attention' to 27yo son who died from COVID-19
Photos of 27-year-old Pujiyoko show a young man in his prime, who loved to travel, loved adventure and loved life. When he left his impoverished parents in central Java, to work as a crew member on Royal Caribbean's Symphony of the Seas, Pujiyoko was fit, healthy and excited about a job that would take him around the world. "He loved working on that ship," his father, Isanto, said. "A friend told him about the job, and he told us he wanted to go, so I gave him my permission. "It's what he wanted to do. He was the breadwinner for the family." Pujiyoko worked in housekeeping on the cruise liner, which Royal Caribbean promotes as the largest passenger ship in the world by gross tonnage, and one that offers guests "unforgettable experiences for day and night". But while Pujiyoko's last days on board Symphony of the Seas were unforgettable, it was in the worst possible way. On March 23, roughly a week after the last passengers had disembarked in Miami, he fell ill with symptoms of the coronavirus. According to a wrongful death case filed in Miami's circuit court, he presented to the ship's medical facility every day for a week, with worsening symptoms. Fever and body aches developed into severe pneumonia. By March 28 he was put on oxygen. The following day, still on board, he was diagnosed with COVID-19. But it was only on the evening of March 30 that he was finally taken ashore on a lifeboat and then to hospital, where he was put on a ventilator. Less than two weeks later, he died with a "severe anoxic brain injury". Pujiyoko's parents are now suing Royal Caribbean, alleging their son wasn't tested for COVID-19 for a full six days and should have been taken to shore much earlier. "They didn't tend to him fast enough," his father said. "They didn't pay enough attention to him. "Had the company taken him to hospital sooner, he could have survived." His mother, Sukarni, sobbed as she looked at photos of her son on board the cruise ship, smiling alongside his crewmates in happier times. "His plan was to work so he could make us happy," she said. "He told me [he] would send me on the hajj [to Mecca] as a pilgrim, because we are so poor." Royal Caribbean refused to respond to the ABC's request for an interview, saying "we do not comment on pending litigation". The Indonesian family's US-based lawyer Michael Winkleman says not only did the company neglect Pujiyoko, but it did nothing to protect other crew members, even after passengers had disembarked and the fear of the coronavirus on cruise ships was already widespread. The lawsuit alleges that crew members were even "encouraged to attend parties, shows, events and activities that took place aboard the ship" in the two weeks after passengers had disembarked. They required crew to be in close proximity and crowded spaces, but without any protection against COVID-19. "The [US] Centers for Disease Control (CDC) shut down all cruising on March 13," Mr Winkleman said. "And yet even after that it was as though there was nothing going on for the crew members, nothing being done to protect them. No social distancing, no quarantine, no masks." Mr Winkleman says they even had a party on St Patrick's Day where there were probably "hundreds, if not even a thousand crew members". "Again, no masks, no nothing, no precautions taken to protect the crew," he said. The lawsuit states that at least one passenger on Symphony of the Seas had coronavirus symptoms on March 7, a week before passengers disembarked. All further voyages were cancelled once the CDC was notified of positive cases among passengers. But Royal Caribbean "failed to follow even the most basic safety precautions," such as quarantining crew members on its ships, providing them with masks, or requiring them to observe social distancing, the lawsuit says. Pujiyoko was one of at least five Indonesians to die from COVID-19 on cruise liners, and one of two who died on Royal Caribbean ships. A Balinese man, I Putu Sugiartha, died on one of Royal Caribbean's other ships, the Oasis of the Seas, on April 18, more than a month after he boarded the ship. The ABC has been told his family settled out of court with the shipping company. More than 100 other crew members on Oasis of the Seas tested positive for COVID-19 while on board, the lawsuit alleges. A Filipino crewman, Dexter Joyosa, also died. There are also concerns for those crew members still stranded on cruise ships. Reports have emerged of apparent suicides and protests by crew members who are still stuck on board, unable to leave. While cruise ship companies have been negotiating for weeks with governments to offload passengers around the world, tens of thousands of crew members remain on ships. "Mental health is a huge issue on those ships," Mr Winkleman said. "You have crew members now, going on plus two months they've been trapped on these ships, away from their families, the vast majority of them not being paid. "Half the time they're quarantined in a tiny little cabin, and these are not the passenger cabins, that are much more spacious, these are tiny little cabins." One crew member on the Regal Princess  a Ukrainian woman  threw herself overboard in the Netherlands on May 9. Rotterdam police have ruled the death a suicide. Another crew member  a Polish man  apparently threw himself off an upper deck of the Jewel of the Seas, another Royal Caribbean ship, in early May, although his body has not been found. Crew members on a separate Royal Caribbean ship, the Majesty of the Seas, last week staged a hunger strike begging to go home. A banner posted on board read: "How Many More Suicides are Needed?" Earlier this month, Manila Bay in the Philippines became the world's biggest "parking lot" for cruise ships, with thousands of crew still on board. More ships were expected to join. But shipping companies argue that flight bans and lockdowns have made it impossible to repatriate all their crew. In an April 17 note titled Crew Repatriation Weekly Update, Royal Caribbean wrote that the CDC had banned all flights for crew repatriation. The CDC, however, says it is allowing crew members on ships in US waters to disembark and return home if cruise lines "submit a signed attestation stating that they have complied with requirements to safely disembark their crew members". Royal Caribbean says repatriation plans are now underway. "So far, we have successfully repatriated over 16,000 crew members, and we are working with governments and health authorities around the world on our plans," the company told the BBC. 
Government's COVID Commission manufacturing plan calls for huge public gas subsidies
State bans on coal seam gas development would be scrapped and the Federal Government would underwrite gas prices and massively subsidise costs and investment for gas companies, under confidential plans for a "gas-led manufacturing recovery" post-COVID-19. The draft plans, obtained by the ABC, call for the scrapping of "green and red tape" on gas development, including a relaxation of Australian standards for equipment used in gas infrastructure and a loosening of environmental regulations and approval processes. They are set out in an interim report from the manufacturing taskforce of the National COVID Coordination Commission (NCCC). The NCCC is a hand-picked team of business leaders and former bureaucrats set up by the Prime Minister's Office to shape the economic recovery from the virus and lockdown, and includes several members with strong links to the gas sector. The manufacturing taskforce includes business representatives as well as union leaders from that sector. Its draft report advocates "underwriting new [gas] supply with government balance sheets" to allow gas producers "to invest with confidence and new pipelines to be built to get the gas to markets". The taskforce says the Government should be "taking a non-operating equity position, minority share, or underwriting position" in gas projects and "provide support, such as low-cost capital, to existing small and mid-cap market participants". It also wants mechanisms to put a government-guaranteed floor under gas prices, so companies can borrow against that guaranteed price. And the NCCC wants massive government spending to underwrite a network of new pipelines linking gas projects in the north-west of Western Australia to the east coast. New gas ventures that meet state-based environmental standards would be exempt from the need to gain federal environmental approvals under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Act if the recommendations of the commission and taskforce are adopted. Concerns about the environment and the impact on agriculture and groundwater have led to the shelving of coal seam gas developments in NSW and Victoria. But the NCCC is urging governments to "lift the moratorium in NSW and the remaining moratoria in Victoria", "initiate a rapid 'red & green tape' reduction" and "establish a global best practice gas development regulatory framework in the Northern Territory  to unlock new supply for the east coast." The contents of the plan highlight potential conflicts of interest for businesspeople involved in the NCCC and its manufacturing taskforce. West Australian businessman Nev Power, who chairs the NCCC, is a director and shareholder of WA-based Strike Energy, which aspires to be "the lowest cost onshore gas producer in Australia" and would potentially benefit from government investment subsidies and the underwriting of gas pipelines. The NCCC report obtained by the ABC advocates "accelerated developments for highly prospective opportunities" including the Perth Basin, which is Strike Energy's main exploration area. The commission's special advisor on manufacturing renewal, former Dow Chemical global chairman and CEO Andrew Liveris, is deputy chairman of the world's biggest oil and gas consultancy and engineering firm, Worley, and is also a director of Saudi Aramco, the world's biggest oil and gas company, which has ambitions to invest in Australia. Facilitating foreign direct investment in the gas industry is one of the report's recommendations. A Senate committee which examined the taskforce last week was told that members of the NCCC were required to sign a conflict of interest declaration but, as a "special advisor" to the commission, Mr Liveris was not. The Federal Government's National COVID Coordination Commission has a lot of gas industry players involved, and it appears to be showing in its policy recommendations. Speaking at the committee hearings, the CEO of the NCCC, former Productivity Commission chairman Peter Harris, said the commission had established "what you might consider to the normal declaration process" for conflicts of interest at the start of each of its meetings. He said that as NCCC chairman, Nev Power had "taken it upon himself to advise commissioners that  should they encounter something which involves commercially sensitive information which could create a perception that they are being put in an advantageous position, they should draw that matter to his attention or, in his absence, to my attention." Mr Harris added that the commission would "construct an arrangement by which they can either continue their involvement in this or remove themselves from involvement  and another commissioner will take over." In a statement to the ABC from the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, on behalf of the NCCC, the commission reiterated that it follows "best-practice arrangements for managing the integrity of its advice". "That includes recusal from discussions where there may be a conflict of interest and written declarations to the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet recording their interests and those of their family members," the statement noted. "The commission has also put in place additional processes to manage potential conflicts of interest, such as commencing each meeting of the NCCC with a declaration of any relevant conflicts." When asked by The Business host Elysse Morgan in an interview earlier this month whether his involvement with Strike Energy presented any conflict of interest given his role at the commission, Mr Power said he supported all types of energy. He described Strike as "an emerging player in the gas market in Western Australia". When asked again about the potential for conflicts in a recent interview with the Financial Review, Mr Power said "we are very transparent about our interests" and the commission had "processes" to address that issue. "We are there to provide business advice and we are upfront about that." Mr Power said, ultimately, the government would make decisions, not the commission. In the vision of the taskforce, gas development goes hand-in-hand with development of energy-intensive manufacturing industries, including chemicals and "mineral tech". Renewables are not to blame for soaring electricity costs: gas is the main culprit, writes Ian Verrender. But the NCCC's emphasis on a "gas-led manufacturing recovery" and call for government subsidies and relaxing of environmental controls has drawn severe criticism from analysts and advocacy groups who support a shift away from fossil fuels to renewable energy. "It's a blueprint for the gas industry, it's not a manufacturing blueprint, it's pathetic," said Tim Buckley, director of energy research at the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis, who spent 30 years in senior roles in investment banking. "They say we need to correct the 'market failures' of our current energy supply to reduce electricity costs and 'break the investment logjam'. "As far as I am concerned, spending 80 billion dollars in east coast gas markets in the last eight years is an exact opposite of an investment logjam." Mr Buckley said there was a huge irony that the gas industry's massive, unprofitable investment in three giant gas export terminals off the coast of Queensland was responsible for a massive rise in gas prices for Australian industry. "The very industry that has created a massive inflationary pressure that has undermined our manufacturing base is now saying the gas industry should get massive subsidies," he said. "Their answer to the gas industry absolutely decimating the manufacturing industry is for tax payers to underwrite a rescue of the gas industry. "They say they want 'a free and open trading regime', yet they are calling for taxpayers to provide massive capital subsidies and to underwrite gas prices." On the reckoning of the NCCC, Australian gas prices have tripled since 2014, when the export terminals were built. WA has cheaper gas prices than the east coast because the State Government made companies set some gas aside for local use. While there is mention of gas reservation policy  which would see a set amount of gas set aside for domestic use, rather than export  it does not feature in the report's key points, which focus on public investment, increased production and pipelines. Dan Gocher, director of climate and environment at the Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility, accuses the industry of using COVID-19 as cover. "This is predatory behaviour from the gas industry," he argued. "They are opportunistically using the COVID-19 crisis to push through uneconomic, polluting plans dependent on taxpayer subsidies, which until the pandemic hit were beyond their wildest dreams." While aspects of the draft plan have widespread support within the gas sector  such as reduced environmental regulation and more streamlined approval processes  the construction of an east-west pipeline has received widespread criticism within the industry for its prohibitive cost. The interim report has an extensive list of people the NCCC's manufacturing taskforce spoke to in devising its plan. It includes a large number of executives from the energy and resources industry including gas giants Santos and Inpex, oil and gas explorers Pangea Resources and Blue Energy, chemical giants Dow, Orica, and IncitecPivot, oil and gas engineering consultancy Worley, and mining giants BHP and Rio Tinto. Only one firm from the clean energy sector was included in the list, EPC Technologies, and it was the company's senior gas and hydrogen expert who was consulted. However, the commission noted that the Manufacturing Taskforce was only one of its working groups. "The commission has liaised with well over a thousand stakeholders representing a broad cross-section of the business community including individuals and organisations with expertise in renewable energy," it said in a statement. "The commission has established a number of working groups to explore issues and bring forward ideas for further consideration, of which the manufacturing working group is one." 
Russia says many coronavirus patients died of other causes, putting its official COVID-19 death toll in doubt
Debate has surged in Russia around to what degree coronavirus must exacerbate existing conditions for it to be recorded as the cause of death, and it could be the reason why Russia's death rate is so low. Before she died in a Moscow hospital earlier this month, Liubov Kashaeva, 74, twice tested positive for COVID-19 but her death was not attributed to the virus, however. It was put down to the cancer she had been suffering from. "The medical death certificate ... said she died of a malignant tumour. Coronavirus was not mentioned anywhere," Kashaeva's daughter-in-law, Daria Kornilova said. Ms Kashaeva is one of thousands of Russians infected with COVID-19 whose deaths have been put down to other causes. Russia has registered the second highest number of infections globally wi9th over 308,000 global cases, and 2,972 deaths.  Those figures produce a death rate of 1.88 per 100,000 Russians, according to figures compiled by the Johns Hopkins University. The equivalent figure for the US, who have the most cases in the world, is 27.61 per 100,000 Americans, and 52.45 in Britain.  Comparatively in Australia, where 100 people have died from the virus the rate is 0.40. "We now know all the characteristics of COVID-19 sufficiently well," said pathologist Oleg Zairatyants, author of the Moscow Health Department guidelines for coronavirus autopsies. "The result (of the analysis) is objective and pronounced by the commission ... Unfortunately people are dying, but their cause of death is clear to us," he said, when asked about deaths not being attributed to COVID-19 even when someone had tested positive for the virus. However, the relatives of several deceased patients dispute that their loved ones would have died when they did had it not been for the virus. Ms Kashaeva had been diagnosed with late-stage bowel cancer in January but she was due to start chemotherapy and the family expected to have more time with her. On May 3, Ms Kashaeva was taken into hospital after feeling weak. Scans showed she'd developed pneumonia in both lungs, a common symptom of coronavirus infection, and two tests were taken, coming back positive.  Just 5 days later on May 8, Ms Kashaeva died. "Coronavirus killed our grandmother of course and we're grieving," Ms Kornilova said. "If it wasn't for coronavirus, with chemotherapy she would have held out for some time." Moscow, the epicentre of Russia's coronavirus outbreak, reports that over 60 per cent of deaths of people infected with coronavirus in April did not enter its death toll tally, and were put down to other causes. The Moscow Health Department said the way Russia counted coronavirus deaths was more accurate than other countries and cited the benefits of a nationwide testing programme which has seen over 7 million tests done. Ms Kornilova said she felt that the decision on how to classify her mother-in-law's death "depended on the party line. "And as far as I know, right now, the party line says ... that Russia's death toll must be as low as possible." The Kremlin said Russia's use of autopsies in determining cause of death set it apart from many western countries, who unlike Russia don't rely on a post-mortem analysis. "We're not hiding anything. Cause of death is determined by an autopsy. It's specifically the autopsy that allows us to produce an accurate judgment, on the basis of which cause of death can differ," said Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov Alexey Erlikh, head of intensive cardiac care at Moscow's Hospital 29, which has been designated to treat coronavirus, is one of many doctors that says the distinction is arbitrary. "Simply put, no one ever dies 'from' a virus. People die from complications resulting from a virus," Dr Erlikh said. "But they also die from the complications of a chronic illness that are caused by the virus. Some people believe that such deaths shouldn't be counted in the coronavirus death toll. I believe they should. "On this point I am strongly at odds with some of my colleagues, those top doctors whose pictures are hanging up all over the city." In Britain, all deaths of people who tested positive for coronavirus, and those with a negative test where coronavirus is suspected, enter the death toll, according to Dr Carl Heneghan. "We're not in a position to distinguish dying 'from' or 'with' coronavirus," he said. Speaking anonymously, a Moscow-based pathologist said that making a clear distinction between the two was virtually impossible. The World Health Organization (WHO) says it sees no problems with Russia's approach. "There is no conscious undercounting," Melita Vujnovic, the WHO's chief representative in Russia, told Russian state TV.  "It is possible that some recounts may be done or something else ... but right now I don't see anything serious." ABC/ Reuters 
Australia started a fight with China over an investigation into COVID-19  did it go too hard?
It was the interview that sent hares running around the world. One month ago, Foreign Minister Marise Payne told the ABC's Insiders program that Australia would push for an independent international inquiry into the outbreak of COVID-19. Prime Minister Scott Morrison went a step further two days later, suggesting that the World Health Organization (WHO) needed tough new "weapons inspector" powers to investigate what caused the outbreak. It was political dynamite. Australia's friends and allies in Europe, still desperately scrambling to contain the pandemic at home, were startled. Why hadn't Australia got on the phone before wading into such fraught territory? The Chinese Government was  predictably  incensed, accusing Australia of launching a political attack on China and "pandering" to the United States. The furore intensified after China's ambassador hit back by warning of a consumer boycott, and it was supercharged by China's decision to hit Australian exports of beef, and lock in tariffs on barley. But one month after that first interview, the Morrison Government has now emerged battered and bloodied from the diplomatic fray, clutching a piece of paper, and declaring victory. Last night the World Health Assembly (WHA) passed a European Union motion calling for a "comprehensive, independent and impartial" investigation into how the pandemic started and the international health response. A record 137 countries  including both Australia and China  ended up co-sponsoring the motion, giving it overwhelming international endorsement. So was this a blazing victory for Australia and principled diplomacy? Or did the Federal Government blunder into a pointless stoush with China by going too hard, too early? One source in the Federal Government argues the decision to go both hard and early was quite deliberate. While the Government would have liked to gather allies before going public, its options looked threadbare. Australia would traditionally turn first to the US for help building an international coalition, but Australian officials were deeply anxious about the inflammatory rhetoric being used by both Donald Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo on the pandemic. The chances of a US-led inquiry getting broad international support looked perishingly small. The Government also worried that European countries  still reeling after being smashed by the first wave of coronavirus infections  would be too distracted to champion the principle of an inquiry. So, the United States was too keen, and Europe was not keen enough. The Coalition reasoned that if it wanted to kickstart an international debate about an inquiry, then it also wanted to frame the debate on its terms. In the days and weeks after that Insiders interview, both Mr Morrison and Senator Payne hit the phones to rally support. The Foreign Minister logged calls with almost 40 of her counterparts as well as the UN Secretary-General and the WHO's Director-General. The deadline was tight. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade quickly identified the best place to push the inquiry forward  a meeting of the World Health Assembly in Geneva, which was due in only four weeks.   But the initial response was cautious. In a phone call with Mr Morrison, French President Emmanuel Macron backed the broad principle of an inquiry. But he also made it clear that France was deeply preoccupied with containing the virus and did not want to see the international community fractured by an acrimonious debate over the outbreak. The Federal Government quickly realised that it would need to make concessions if it wanted to gather a substantial coalition of countries to push for an investigation. The big compromise came first. The Coalition holds deep-seated concerns about the WHO leadership, and worries it has drawn too close to China. Senator Payne said on Insiders the organisation should have nothing to do with the inquiry, saying that struck her as a "somewhat poacher and gamekeeper" arrangement. But with the clock ticking  and agreement elusive on which other body could possibly take the lead on an inquiry  Australia agreed to narrow its ambition. On May 7 Australia swung its support behind a European Union draft motion which called only for an "evaluation" of the outbreak by some of the WHO's independent review committees. The review committee was already a known quantity, as it had been set up in the wake of the Ebola outbreak.  Multilateral organisations like precedents, and Australian officials thought there was a good chance that other nations would be comfortable with it taking the reins of an investigation.  At this stage the list of co-sponsors was very small, including only the EU, Argentina and some minnows like Monaco and North Macedonia. Still, ducking behind the EU motion not only instantly gave Australia a bloc of allies, it also took some of the heat out of the delicate negotiations on the motion  particularly when it came to talks with Chinese officials. The Morrison Government seems to be betting that all it needs to do is hold its nerve and hold the line when it comes to China's trade threats. The Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister also toned down their rhetoric. Coalition ministers were unyielding in their call for an independent inquiry, but there was much less talk about giving the WHO "weapons inspector" powers. Meanwhile, Australian diplomats poured all their energy into trying to beef up the language in the EU motion to ensure it could provide a workable framework for a proper inquiry. The words "impartial" and "independent" were injected into the text. Simultaneously, officials worked to reassure European countries that the push for an inquiry wouldn't distract from the immediate crisis of tackling the outbreak. As the WHA meeting approached, the momentum behind the inquiry push quickly grew. Two days before the meeting, 62 countries  including major powers like India, South Korea, Japan and Indonesia  had signed on as co-sponsors. That number had swelled to more than 100 by Sunday night, before China finally climbed on board just before the vote on Tuesday. The motion passed by the WHA is a compromise. There is no specific mention of China. There are no new powers for the WHO. And the most likely review mechanism is an independent committee which sits within  not outside  the organisation. The Chinese Embassy in Canberra has been scathing. It says China was always willing to agree to a "scientific investigation" and Australia's initial call for an independent inquiry outside the WHO has floundered. Earlier this week it escalated the dispute further, issuing an extraordinarily contemptuous statement. "To claim the World Health Assembly's resolution is a vindication of Australia's call is nothing but a joke," it read. But Senator Payne argues Australia's key demands have been met, and the Coalition is celebrating the result at the WHA as a clear diplomatic victory. While the committee likely to take on the probe is a WHO body, Senator Payne maintains its expert members are not beholden to the organisation's leadership. "They are from the international system with very broad experience in a range of public health areas," she said. "They serve in their personal capacity, they are not, if you like, part of the WHO structure." The Government also points out that the motion specifically permits "scientific and collaborative field missions" to work out exactly how the disease made the jump from animals to humans.  Queensland senator Matt Canavan called the success of the motion a "massive vindication" for the Government, while Health Minister Greg Hunt said Australia "helped provide the impetus and the resolve" needed at the WHA to push the inquiry motion over the line. Not all foreign policy watchers are so convinced. Associate Professor Matthew Sussex from the Australian National University said Australia's attempt to get out in front of the issue "needlessly annoyed the EU, and further problematised our relationship with China". "There's a good argument to say that we stood to gain more by waiting," he said. "The EU would have gone to the WHA anyway, and Canberra could have played a middle role to mediate whatever hard line Washington had come up with, building consensus and a coalition in the process. "It was an own goal, and hardly a triumph for middle-power diplomacy." Other experts are quicker to give the Federal Government credit. The head of the National Security College, Rory Medcalf, said the Government's call for an independent inquiry was both principled and courageous. Professor Medcalf said the Government got off to a "somewhat ragged start" on its negotiations with other countries, but it "refined and evolved its approach pretty rapidly". "The diplomatic courage and the forthrightness of Australia really taking a stand on this issue will be borne out in the historical record," he said. 
Global coronavirus cases pass 5 million as situation worsens in Brazil, Russia, India
There are now more than 5 million cases of coronavirus around the world, with a record 106,000 new cases recorded in the last 24 hours, the World Health Organization says. 1 million new cases are now being reported every two weeks WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said two-thirds of the new cases came from just four countries  the US, Russia, Brazil and India. "We still have a long way to go in this pandemic," Dr Tedros said. "We are very concerned about rising cases in low and middle-income countries." Latin America overtook the US and Europe in the past week to report the largest portion of new daily cases globally. It represents a new phase in the spread of the virus, which initially peaked in China in February before large-scale outbreaks in Europe and the United States. Latin America accounted for around a third of the 91,000 cases reported earlier this week. Europe and the United States each accounted for just over 20 per cent. A large number of those new cases came from Brazil, which recently surpassed Germany, France and the United Kingdom to become the third-largest outbreak in the world, behind the United States and Russia. Cases in Brazil are now rising at a daily pace second only to the US. The WHO has come under fire from US President Donald Trump, who accuses it of having mishandled the outbreak and favouring China. This week Mr Trump threatened to withdraw from the WHO and permanently withhold US funding. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Dr Tedros acknowledged having received a letter from Mr Trump, but declined to comment further. The WHO has announced a review into the response to the pandemic. "WHO calls for accountability more than anyone," Dr Tedros said of the review, while declining to give a timeline for it starting. "It has to be done and when it's done it has to be a comprehensive one." The first 41 cases of coronavirus were confirmed in Wuhan, China, on January 10 and it took the world until April 1 to reach its first million cases. Since then, about 1 million new cases have been reported every two weeks, according to a Reuters tally. At more than 5 million cases, the virus has infected more people in under six months than the annual total of severe flu cases, which the World Health Organization estimates is around 3 million to 5 million globally. The pandemic has officially claimed more than 326,000 lives, though the true number is thought to be higher as testing is still limited and many countries do not include fatalities outside hospitals. Over half of the total deaths have been recorded in Europe. Despite the continued increase in cases, many countries are opening schools and workplaces following weeks of lockdown that have stemmed the spread. Financial markets have also been boosted slightly by promising early results from the first US vaccine trial in humans. ABC/wires 
UK beaches packed on year's hottest day after easing of coronavirus measures
Thousands of people descended on British beaches on the UK's hottest day of the year, after the easing of coronavirus restrictions across England. With the official start of summer still a month away, the temperature reached 28.2 degrees Celsius at Santon Downham in Suffolk on Wednesday, with 27.8C recorded at London's Heathrow Airport. Popular seaside destinations, including Brighton, Bournemouth and Southend-on-Sea reported large midweek crowds. Under new rules in England, people are allowed to travel to leisure spots and meet one person outside their household, but are required to follow social-distancing guidelines. Tougher quarantine measures remain in place elsewhere in the UK, with the leaders of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland all sticking to the "Stay at Home" messaging. Southend Independent councillor Martin Terry said most people were observing social distancing and the council was doing everything it could to keep people safe. But some beachgoers on social media complained that not everyone was adhering to the recommendation to stay 6 feet (1.8 metres) apart. There were also long queues for seaside restaurants, including takeaway outlets serving traditional British fish and chips. Lockdown measures were eased in England last week following almost two months of restrictions. The UK's death toll from COVID-19 rose by 363 on Wednesday to 35,704, the highest tally in Europe and second in the world behind only the US. As many of its citizens visited beauty spots, the British Government pledged to have a "test, track and trace" program for coronavirus in place by June 1. It also sought to bring as many MPs as possible back to parliament by June 2. The dual announcements formed part of a strategy to persuade the UK that it is safe to move on to the next stage of easing the COVID-19 lockdown, with the reopening of schools for some younger children at the start of June.  Prime Minister Boris Johnson, who returned to work after a serious battle with COVID-19 last month, has been criticised for his Government's failure to have a national tracing system in place over the past 10 weeks.  "We're making fast progress in testing and tracing and I have great confidence that by June 1 we will have a system that will enable us, that will help us very greatly to defeat this disease," Mr Johnson said. British police issued more than 14,000 fines to lockdown flouters in England and Wales between March 27 and May 11, including 906 handed out to Londoners and 862 to repeat offenders. The penalty has now risen from 60 pounds ($111) to 100 pounds ($185). The unseasonably warm weather has seen many people throw caution to the wind as they look to socialise again after spending much of spring indoors. The average top temperature for London in May is 18C. ABC/wires 
Coronavirus impact: Census data shows which Canberra suburbs are most vulnerable to economic effects of COVID-19
Canberra is slowly emerging from the coronavirus pandemic  it has been free of known cases for most of this month. But while social distancing restrictions are easing, the economic consequences of containing the disease are just beginning to be measured. An estimated 8,700 Canberrans lost their jobs last month, the Australian Bureau of Statistics says. It was the largest monthly job loss in the bureau's dataset, which goes back four decades. Similarly, the number of Canberrans who are under-employed (working fewer hours than they want to) almost doubled to more than 22,000  another record increase. We know from the bureau's survey that almost every job lost in the ACT was casual or part-time. But is it also possible to tell which parts of the city will be the worst-affected? In the pandemic's early stages, a tech firm, Seer Data and Analytics, set about answering a similar question for the New South Wales Treasury's data analytics centre. Seer's chief data scientist, Adam Peaston, said the project's goal was to "shine a light on which communities will be suffering economically". This is not the same as finding the most disadvantaged areas, which are already well known. Instead, Seer modelled which areas were most vulnerable to the business restrictions put in place over the past two months. "We're comparing locations which have a high rate of people employed in vulnerable industries and vulnerable occupations within the context of COVID-19," Peaston says. "We then intersect those types of areas with areas where people are already struggling to keep pace with either their rent or mortgage. "This is where you'd expect to have the combination of large numbers of people losing their jobs and being unable to make payments towards their housing." Seer's technique, applied to ACT and Queanbeyan suburbs (excluding those with fewer than 1,000 people), suggests Canberra's fringes will suffer more than the rest of the city. The analysis weights two factors evenly: Four of the five most vulnerable suburbs are in Gungahlin  Casey, Bonner, Ngunnawal and Franklin  while nearby Macgregor is the other. Other areas of concern are the new Molonglo suburbs of Wright and Coombs which, like Gungahlin's fringes, are home to many families with relatively large mortgages. Meanwhile, Queanbeyan, Bruce and the student suburb of Acton have particularly high numbers of workers with at-risk jobs. Unsurprisingly, the least exposed areas in Canberra are the established, diplomatic-belt suburbs of the inner south, such as Yarralumla, Deakin and Forrest. While suburbs can change over time  the census data is now four years old  Peaston said governments and non-profits need to know where to look to find people in need before their lives fall into crisis. "I think these will be the places to watch carefully, to see if people in those areas are facing residual difficulties, even as restrictions ease," he said. "Perhaps businesses haven't been able to keep as many people employed, or give them enough hours. "There may be large numbers of people there who are about to tip over that housing security threshold." Even more so, he added, if a second wave of COVID-19 cases sparks another lockdown, and even greater economic losses. 
Police fire tear gas in Hong Kong as hundreds protest against proposed national security laws
Police in Hong Kong have fired tear gas and used a water cannon and pepper spray to disperse thousands of people protesting against Beijing's plan to directly impose national security laws on the city, the biggest flare-up there since COVID-19 lockdowns began. Protesters took to the shopping district of Causeway Bay on Sunday chanting "Revolution of our time. Liberate Hong Kong" and "Hong Kong Independence, the only way out".  The protest was the first since Beijing proposed national security laws on Thursday and posed a fresh challenge to Chinese President Xi Jinping as authorities struggle to tame public opposition to China's tightening grip over the global financial hub. Hong Kong democracy activists say the national security legislation is evidence of Beijing's encroachment on freedoms guaranteed to Hong Kong under its "one country, two systems" style of governance. The arrangement, which has been in place since the former UK colony's return to Chinese rule in 1997, guarantees the city broad freedoms not seen on the mainland, including a free press and independent judiciary. Police raised blue flags, warning protesters to disperse, before firing multiple rounds of tear gas. They later fired a water cannon at the protesters. At least 120 people were arrested, mostly on charges of unlawful assembly, police said in a Facebook post. They said in a separate post protesters threw bricks and splashed unidentified liquid at officers, injuring at least four members of the police's media liaison team.  They warned that such behaviour was against the law and police would pursue the matter. Earlier in the afternoon, prominent activist Tam Tak-chi was arrested during the protest for what police said was unauthorised assembly.  Mr Tam said he was giving a "health talk" and was exempt from social-distancing measures that prohibit gatherings of more than eight people. Sunday's rallies are a continuation of a months-long pro-democracy movement that began last year and has at times descended into violence between police and protesters. The new law, expected to be passed on May 28, would bypass the city's legislature and allow the Hong Kong Government to set up mainland agencies in the city. There are fears it will allow Chinese agents to arbitrarily arrest people for activities deemed to be pro-democracy. Police conducted stop-and-search operations in Causeway Bay and warned people not to violate a ban on gatherings of more than eight people, imposed to curb the spread of coronavirus. "Now is the beginning of the end, and time is really running out in Hong Kong, and that's the reason for us  even under the outbreak of COVID-19  we still need to gather our strength to protest," democracy activist Joshua Wong said. Authorities in Beijing and Hong Kong have said the proposed laws are necessary and will not harm the city's autonomy. "These radical claims and illegal violence are extremely worrying," Chief Secretary Matthew Cheung said in a blog post. "We must face [this issue] squarely. If the situation is not effectively contained, it may be elevated to the level of endangering national security." Hong Kong was handed back to China with no framework for what would happen after the year 2047, leaving the city to carve an identity out of two ideologically opposed empires. Secretary for Security John Lee said the laws would help maintain Hong Kong's long-term prosperity. A small group of democracy activists protested outside Beijing's Liaison Office, chanting, "National security law is destroying two systems". A water-cannon truck was parked outside, while dozens of riot police were deployed across the city. Avery Ng of the League for Social Democrats pasted protest signs on a plaque outside the Liaison Office, despite warnings from police. He described it as an "evil law" and appealed to Hong Kong people to come out and protest against it. "It's a moveable red line. In future they can arrest, lock up and silence anyone they want in the name of national security. We have to resist it," he said. Some local commentators have described the proposal as "a nuclear option" that is part of Mr Xi's high-stakes power play. A backlash intensified on Saturday as nearly 200 political figures from around the world said in a statement the proposed laws were a "comprehensive assault on the city's autonomy, rule of law and fundamental freedoms". China dismissed other countries' complaints as "meddling" and rejected concerns the proposed laws would harm foreign investors. Wires 
JobKeeper explained: What your boss can and cannot ask you to do
It's been less than two months since the Federal Government announced its $70 billion JobKeeper package for Australians who have lost their jobs or been forced out of work due to the coronavirus pandemic.  Eligible employees began to receive the payment from the start of this month, backdated to 30 March when the scheme was first announced. However some businesses have come under fire for asking their employees to work so they can "earn" the payment. That's raised questions about whether employers can make their employees work or perform other duties to receive the JobKeeper payment  so the ABC has spoken to the experts to find out.  JobKeeper is part of the Federal Government's $320 billion economic support package to subsidise wages for businesses impacted by the coronavirus pandemic. It was designed to help employers pay their employees during the coronavirus pandemic for up to six months, with businesses claiming a reimbursement from the Federal Government through the Australian Tax Office. Eligible businesses must first apply for the scheme before nominating their employees to receive a fortnightly payment of $1,500 before tax. The Federal Government estimates that some 3.5 million Australian workers will benefit from the payment, and more than 910,000 businesses have applied for the scheme to date. "Technically under JobKeeper, it's not lawful to make an employee earn the JobKeeper allowance," said Zana Bytheway, executive director at employment legal rights service JobWatch. Ms Bytheway said JobKeeper was meant to help businesses which had seen a downturn in business because of the coronavirus pay their employees. "Say you work two days a week and have been stood down as a consequence of coronavirus, therefore you are home for that period of time and you are an eligible employee to receive a JobKeeper allowance," Ms Bytheway explained. "The employer is required to pass on the full benefit of that $1,500 to you even though your income would have been $1,000 per fortnight." But JobKeeper isn't only available for those who are now suddenly without work due to coronavirus. "You're also able to receive JobKeeper if you are working and you have got the capacity to work," Ms Bytheway added. It depends on the type of change. Your hours can be reduced temporarily as part of the "JobKeeper enabling stand down directions" made by your employer, which is part of the Fair Work Act and allows employers to reduce the number of days or hours an employee usually works. The Fair Work Ombudsman said an eligible employee could be given the direction if they were unable to be usefully employed for their normal working days or hours due to the pandemic or measures taken by the Government to slow the spread of the virus. But the direction does not allow for employers to increase the number of hours their employees work.  "They [employees] can't be forced or coerced to work more than they usually would," Jannette Armstrong, Tasmanian secretary of the United Workers Union, said. Employers also can't ask their employees to work additional hours to mimic the number they would have to work to typically receive $1,500 a fortnight. The Fair Work Ombudsman says that's "not likely to be reasonable". But that is not to say working more hours is out of the question while receiving JobKeeper payments.  Employers can ask employees if they want to work more hours, but Fair Work says any increase "needs to be reasonable". Whether employees choose to work the extra hours offered though is up to the employee  and they can refuse if it isn't reasonable. "There's a whole host of reasons why it might not be reasonable or realistic for a person's hours to be increased," Ms Armstrong said. "A lot of people are in these new situations, where they're having to homeschool and having to care for other people who might have been at school or childcare and now can't because of the shutdown and isolation." Similar to the hours you work, the duties you perform at work can also be changed.  Ms Bytheway said in order for that to happen, certain conditions needed to be met. "You have to consider safety, you have to consider the skills and competencies of the person in order to do that and, of course, if there are licences and qualifications involved, that is also a consideration," she said. Fair Work said the direction also had to be reasonable, otherwise it did not apply to the employee. The duties must also be related to the operation of the business they work at, meaning odd jobs likely won't fit the bill. Some duties can also attract a higher base pay rate, depending on an award or enterprise agreement. If that's the case, Fair Work says the employee needs to be paid at the higher rate.  By the same token, employers cannot reduce an employee's rate if the duties they're now performing typically attract a lower base pay rate than what the employee usually receives. Employers are also unable to change the duties of employees immediately. Fair Work said employers needed to notify employees about any change in usual duties at least three days before the change was made through the JobKeeper enabling direction, consult with employees about the direction and keep a written record of it, and give the employee the agreed direction in writing. Ms Armstrong encouraged employees to raise the matter with their employer directly if they were comfortable about that. "But I would absolutely recommend that they get some support and some advice about their rights and entitlements before doing so," she said. Ms Bytheway said it could also potentially be a JobKeeper dispute, and would be considered as a matter for the Fair Work Commission.  "They can then arbitrate, mediate or conciliate the disputes and essentially can make an order in relation to the direction," she said. A Fair Work spokesperson said anyone with an urgent enquiry about their workplace obligations could contact the Fair Work Ombudsman on 13 13 94 or through the website. 
Ambassador intervenes after Mike Pompeo warns US could 'disconnect' from Australia over Victoria's Belt and Road deal
The US ambassador to Australia has played down a suggestion from his Secretary of State Mike Pompeo that his nation could "simply disconnect" from Australia if Victoria's trade deal with Beijing threatened its telecommunication security. On Sunday morning, Mr Pompeo said while he was not aware of the detail of Victoria's agreement, it could impact his nation's Five Eyes intelligence-sharing partnership with Australia. In an interview with Sky News, Mr Pompeo warned the Belt and Road agreement with the Andrews Government increased the Chinese communist regime's ability to do "harm". China's trillion-dollar Belt and Road initiative (BRI) is a global infrastructure push aiming to recreate the glory days of China's ancient Silk Road trade routes. The highly controversial scheme has been panned by many Western democracies, including Australia. More and more countries are choosing to ink agreements with China on its trillion-dollar Belt and Road initiative, but what are countries actually agreeing to when they sign on? But Victoria has gone it alone on signing up to the infrastructure initiative, with Premier Daniel Andrews inking a Memorandum of Understanding with China in 2018 and committing to deepen the state's involvement in 2019. The non-legally-binding agreement allows Victorian infrastructure experts to get access to the hundreds of billions of dollars of projects slated for the Belt and Road. It also encourages Chinese infrastructure firms to establish a presence in Victoria and to bid for major infrastructure projects. "I don't know the nature of those projects precisely," Mr Pompeo told Sky News today. "To the extent they have an adverse impact on our ability to protect telecommunications from our private citizens, or security networks for our defence and intelligence communities  we simply disconnect, we will simply separate. "We are going to preserve trust in networks for important information. We hope our friends and allies, especially our Five Eyes partners like Australia, do the same." Mr Pompeo said the scheme broadly came at "some cost" to those who signed on. "Every nation has its own sovereign right to make decisions for itself, and I suppose Victoria has some rights that it can undertake but every citizen of Australia should know that every one of those Belt and Road projects needs to be looked at incredibly closely," he said. On Sunday afternoon, the US ambassador, Arthur Culvahouse Jr, released a statement in response to coverage of Mr Pompeo's interview, saying he wanted to "set the record straight". He said after Mr Pompeo was asked about a "very remote hypothetical", he had carefully noted that he was not across the detail of Victoria's Belt and Road agreement. "The United States has absolute confidence in the Australian Government's ability to protect the security of its telecommunications networks and those of its Five Eyes partners," Mr Culvahouse said. "We have made no secret of our concerns about 5G, and we commend Australia for its leadership on the issue. "We are not aware that Victoria has engaged in any concrete projects under BRI, let alone projects impinging on telecommunications networks, which we understand are a federal matter.  "If there were telecommunications initiatives that we thought put the integrity of our networks at risk, of course we would have to take a close look at that, as the Secretary suggested." The State Opposition has criticised the Andrews Government for continuing with the infrastructure deal despite increased tensions between Canberra and Beijing. China has reacted angrily to the Federal Government's push for an independent inquiry into the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic. Beijing has recently imposed tariffs of 80 per cent on Australian barley and put an import ban on four Australian abattoirs, moves which the Morrison Government says are unrelated to the inquiry. But Victorian Treasurer Tim Pallas last week made a connection to the events, saying: "I don't suppose it would come as a surprise to anybody that this was the consequence of the way that the Federal Government had conducted themselves." He earlier told a parliamentary committee the state would "absolutely not" be putting the deal on hold while the inquiry was conducted. When asked about Mr Pompeo's comments at a press conference on Sunday morning, Mr Andrews said while he had not seen the interview, "my position on these matters is very well known". "It's all about Victoria jobs and we'll continue to work at a strong partnership," he said. "Doesn't mean we agree on everything, there are many things we don't agree on. "But what I think all of us here and indeed both parts of our partnership, both Victoria, Australia and China  surely we all have to concede and we all have to recognise that a good, strong partnership is in everyone's interests." A Government spokesperson later said the Belt and Road framework was "about creating opportunities for Victorian businesses and local jobs  opportunities that will be more important than ever as we rebuild from the coronavirus pandemic". "Telecommunications regulation is the responsibility of the Commonwealth Government," the spokesperson continued. "Victoria has not, and will not in the future, agree to telecommunications projects under the BRI." 
NSW records one new case of COVID-19, as beauty salons allowed to reopen
NSW has recorded just one new case of COVID-19, as authorities announced beauty and tanning salons and nail bars will be allowed to reopen from June 1. Gyms will remain closed for now, however. NSW Health Minister Brad Hazzard said it was a "good day" to be able to flag the new openings.  "Of all ofthe requests I've had as HealthMinister in the last three months,this has been the one that I thinkhas topped the barrel," he said.  "It hascertainly been a very earnest effortfrom a lot of people to make sure wecould open [the salons]." Mr Hazzard advised those beauty business would need to have "a COVID-safe plan" before they reopened, and adhere to 1.5-metre social distancing. "Your task is to not only deliver the services that people need and want, but also make sure they are kept safe," he said. Mr Hazzard also said he was keen to get gyms open as soon as possible, but there were numerous safety elements involved.  He said NSW Health was working with the gym industry to "address the range of issues". Mr Hazzard said aspects  including the use of equipment, the close proximity of participants in elements like spin classes and changerooms at gyms and swimming pools  were all problematic. "There are a whole lot of factors here," he said. The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in the state is now 3,087. Mr Hazzard said the number of tests was fewer than was liked at 6,809, down from 8,995 on the previous 24 hours.  The total number of people tested in NSW to date is now 418,427.  NSW Health's Dr Christine Selvey said the one new recorded case was a person who had returned from the United Kingdom and there was "no risk" of community transmission. NSW Transport Minister Andrew Constance outlined plans ahead of school attendance returning to normal from tomorrow. Parents have been advised to drop children at school where possible, or have students walk or ride if they can. He said the aim was to minimise the numbers of people using public transport. So far numbers have been reduced by 3.3 per cent week on week, with bus use down by 10 per cent. Mr Constance also said there had been 85 million vehicle movements per day, compared with normal levels of 105 million a day. Other measures to be introduced will be a shuttle service running from Moore Park to the city, and also marshals and security teams working in 20 key interchanges including Blacktown, Hurstville and Chatswood. 
Eco-friendly coffins on the rise as Australians look to reduce their environmental footprint
Jan Abel and her partner Murray were among a dozen people who signed up to an eco coffin-making workshop with the hope of reducing their environmental footprint  in both life and death. At the first session, the couple  from Gawler, South Australia  began creating shrouds using natural fibres and designing flat-pack coffins. Murray's sketch featured a vibrant symmetrical motif incorporating his life's many passions. "I'm not ready to go yet so, say in ten or 15 years' time, what's your role?" he asked doula Helen Roberts, who he wanted to help with his end-of-life planning. "I hope in 20 years' time I'll still be there [to help]," she replied. "I don't want to die tomorrow, but I might." Just days after their conversation, Murray had a heart attack and died. "He was a lovely person. We had so much fun," Ms Abel said.  "The day before he died, we were so lucky to be put into [coronavirus isolation] with all the things that we could share together, with art and music and all those sorts of things. "But sadly, by the next morning, he was gone." Murray's family and friends worked together to plan his farewell and decorate a flat-pack coffin. Ms Abel said she wouldn't have known what he wanted unless they had discussed it at the workshop. "I was able to transfer what he wanted onto the coffin and complete it as he wanted to the best of my ability," she said. "It's just been made beautiful because of this project. It would have been so much harder to deal with if I hadn't been able to participate and do his coffin." Organiser Abby Buckley said Murray's death made the eco coffin project more poignant. "We all got to use our skills and think about how to apply our skills sooner than we were planning," she said. "We had this lovely moment where we could come together in COVID-19 restrictions and work with Jan." The program was quickly booked out when it launched in October and has since moved online due to social gathering restrictions. "It's actually worked to our advantage  having the pandemic and people being able to be in their own cocoon and own space to really think about what death is for them and how they want to their body to be treated when they die." Participants have shared their creations  made by crocheting, sewing, felting and painting  and received online talks from experts about dying sustainably. "In Australia, the majority of people are really trying hard to change their ways to live a sustainable life," Ms Buckley said. "We're trying to move from a fossil fuel economy to a renewable economy  And yet, it's like all that thinking goes out the window when we die." "We're learning a dialogue, we're becoming more informed so that when we are working with the professionals in this industry, it's easier for them because they can have a more empowered conversation." Since 2008, more than 170 people have chosen a natural burial at Wirra Wonga in Adelaide's northern suburbs. The area hugs the perimeter of the Enfield Memorial Park and mirrors the native vegetation of adjacent Folland Park Reserve. It was the first dedicated site in Australia where bodies could be naturally buried in biodegradable coffins or wrappings. Graves are marked with trees instead of headstones. "I think for people who are passionate about sustainability, have a lot of values about conservation, this is an appealing process and appealing way to say farewell to the planet," Adelaide Cemeteries Authority chief executive Robert Pitt said. He said natural burials provided consumer choice but also made good business sense. "It's very low-maintenance. It very quickly and very sustainably provides some greenness and better aesthetics to a cemetery," Mr Pitt said. "I'd like to be able to come back in 100 years and see it  my vision is the natural burial ground would have extended  there'll be native trees and scrubs here." Mr Pitt said his sustainability plans extended across all aspects of the business, including the installation of new cremators to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and seeking higher environmental management accreditation. "I'd also love to get rid of any bits of plastic and wire in floral tributes  they're absolutely glorious but we do have some troubles recycling those," he said. "We just think it's the right thing to do and it's also sustainable  there are a lot of reasons why we would do it, in fact, there are very few reasons why we wouldn't." 
Closure of Target Country is a blow to rural communities like mine
Word that Target Country was coming to my hometown was a huge deal  perhaps the biggest news since a popular fast food joint set up shop. In Warwick, in country Queensland, we'd heard all about Target. Many of us knew it well from our trips to the city. But now, we wouldn't have to beg our parents to drive hours for a taste of metropolitan fashion, we could simply duck down to the glossy new shop on Grafton Street. And boy, did we think it was flash. Labelled the 'Country' version of the big city store, it looked and felt like the real deal. There was department store lighting. Nice change rooms. Trendy, better quality clothes you might see in magazines. When Target Country opened in Warwick, two hours west of Brisbane, teenage girls like my sisters, friends and I could spend hours perusing the store's aisles. But experiences like those may soon come to an end. Some stores will close their doors for good within the year and Warwicks shop looks likely to be turned into a Kmart. "It will be massive for Target Country to close," one of my cousins who lives in town tells me. Just this week, she ducked into Target Country for an emergency pair of tracksuit pants for her spirited five-year-old son. "It's so handy that Target Country isn't in the shopping centre. You can park out the front, run in and run out. "If the store in Warwick closed, I'd also really miss having somewhere to go for affordable, yet quality, cotton sheets, towels and good basic clothes for myself." It might sound a little token, but in our town at least, Target Country was its own little thriving community. Our friends worked there, my sister joining them when she turned 14 years and nine months. She worked with people our parents knew, teenage girls we played netball with and older boys she never would've dared to speak to otherwise. You'd always know when there was a school social or formal coming up in Warwick  Target Country would be teeming with young people ready to spend their casual job wages. "It was probably one of the only places in Warwick where teenage girls could buy a cute top or skirt because it was trying to be fashionable but it was also pretty affordable," my sister remembers. For some, it offered something even more, including for one local who was getting married. "She bought her bridesmaids their dresses at Target Country," my sister says. "I can still remember it was a pale orange synthetic silk dress with thin straps. It came below the knee and had quite a flowy skirt. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "All the bridesmaids came in and tried them on and it was a really exciting day for everyone." For us bush kids, Target Country introduced us to a whole new world of homewares, toys and electronics. We learned to navigate the concept of laybuy. We had a broader range of bras to choose from. We could even buy activewear. How would we  and many other rural communities  feel if we lost Target Country? Like we'd lost a part of our little town  and our history. 
Domestic violence victims on temporary visas need urgent protections, experts warn
Domestic violence victims on temporary visas are being trapped in dangerous situations because they are unable to access crucial support, experts say,and the coronavirus pandemic appears to be exacerbating their plight. Family and domestic violence support services:1800 Respect National Helpline: 1800 737 732Women's Crisis Line (NSW): 1800 656 463Safe Steps Crisis Line (Vic): 1800 015 188Men's Referral Service: 1300 766 491Lifeline (24-hour Crisis Line): 131 114Relationships Australia: 1300 364 277 Despite several inquiries recommending changes to Australia's visa system, advocates say the government has consistently failed to take action, leaving many temporary visa holders experiencing abuse without access to key health and social services, including Centrelink, Medicare and housing. Perpetrators also commonly use victims' temporary migration status as a weapon of coercion, meaning many feel pressured to stay in violent relationships.  With more than two million people in Australia on temporary visas, advocates are calling for urgent protections, with family violence services reporting COVID-19 restrictions have triggered a surge in calls from women locked out of the system. It comes following the death this week of Western Sydney woman, Kamaljeet Sidhu, who was allegedly murdered by her husband less than a month after police took out an apprehended violence order against him.  Ms Sidhu, 27, had moved with her husband from India to Australia two years ago, and was on a student visa at the time of her death. Michal Morris, the chief executive of inTouch Multicultural Centre Against Family Violence, said that since March her service had seen a 20 per cent increase in the number of women calling for help with family violence, many of whom are temporary visa holders.  "Because they're on a temporary visa, they have very limited access to employment and Centrelink benefits. They're also not eligible for any of the government stimulus package supports and ... tend to work as casuals or in industries which were shut down pretty quickly, for example restaurants or beauty salons," Morris told ABC News.  Refuges often have to make "difficult decisions" to turn away women on temporary visas, Morris said, because their lack of income and access to housing often means they have to stay longer than other women fleeing violence. "We're forcing support services to make really horrible choices. If a woman is in a legitimate relationship in Australia and is experiencing family violence, we need to be able to support her to leave the relationship, but also to recover." Marie Segrave, an associate professor of criminology at Monash University, said many women also avoid seeking help with domestic violence because they're being coerced by partners who use their temporary migration status as "leverage for abuse".  "The main thing we have consistently failed to recognise in Australia is that perpetrators are enabled and emboldened by the limits on what support we provide to women on temporary migration visas," Dr Segrave told ABC News.  For example, Dr Segrave said she had encountered cases of women on temporary visas whose partners have forced them to work more hours than they're permitted to, then threatened to report them to immigration under the false pretence they'll be deported. The partners of other women have threatened to withdraw sponsorship of their visas if they do not comply with demands.  "These women are invisible, and the system supports their perpetrators remaining invisible and not being held to account," Dr Segrave said. "The refusal to recognise that temporary migration creates specific forms of vulnerability ... means women's safety is compromised repeatedly, because we know what the consequences are." These vulnerabilities have been examined in detail by a series of major inquiries over the last decade, all of which have recommended specific and urgent reforms, including to address the inconsistencies in access to services between states. This includes the Australian Law Reform Commission in 2011, Victoria's Royal Commission into Family Violence in 2016, the NSW Domestic Violence Death Review team in 2017, and the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs in 2019. In its latest report, published in March, the NSW DV Death Review Team said it had made several recommendations directed at the Commonwealth Government to address the vulnerability of women on temporary visas, an issue it said was reflected in "a number of cases" in previous review periods.  However, it said, "there has been very little, if any, action in response to these recommendations".  The review team said it had been advised by settlement services that "vulnerable or impermanent visa status remains one of, if not the most, significant issue for their clients who are experiencing domestic violence". And the Senate Inquiry into dowry abuse last year made several recommendations pertaining to Australia's migration program, urging the Commonwealth Government to consider reforms including that family violence protections in the Migration Regulations (1994) be extended beyond certain visa categories and that a temporary visa be made available for holders who are experiencing serious family violence. But more than a year after the inquiry handed down its final report, the Government has yet to respond. Hayley Foster, chief executive of Women's Safety NSW, said the lack of meaningful action means frontline workers face "heart-wrenching" situations on a daily basis.  "When we contact these women, say after a police incident, to ask them how they would like us to support them, we feel so helpless in being unable to offer them real solutions," Foster said.  "It really is a terrible feeling when you go home at the end of the day knowing that women and children are essentially being forced to live in terror because they have nowhere else to go." Foster said the National Advocacy Group on Women on Temporary Visas Experiencing Violence had told the government that "this is a dangerous gap in the domestic violence service system, with lives at stake" but "we simply haven't seen the political leadership in addressing it".  "We need to reform the migration system so that all women on temporary visas who experience domestic violence and their dependents can access protections, services and justice," Foster said.  "How urgent is this problem? Women are dying." A spokesperson for Communities and Justice NSW said the Government was committed to supporting all women experiencing domestic and family violence and funds "a number of initiatives" to help overcome the barriers faced by women on temporary protection visas.  They said the Government had also raised the need for "further support" for victims on temporary visas with the federal government "on multiple occasions".  "This was most recently discussed at this week's Women's Safety Council COAG meeting attended by all relevant officials and Ministers," the spokesperson said. "Senior officials are working closely on solutions to address this issue." Dr Segrave said there had been "some commitment" to fixing the problem, including by recognising it in the fourth national plan to reduce violence against women and children, but that it had "clearly dropped off the agenda". "Women's safety, the rate of family violence in our community, the kinds of harm that are occurring and the long-term impacts  this is absolutely a national emergency," she said. "And we are missing a significant opportunity to address it,."  
Former PNG prime minister Peter O'Neill charged with misappropriation, corruption and abuse of office
Former Papua New Guinea prime minister Peter O'Neill has been charged with misappropriation, official corruption and abuse of office. Mr O'Neill was arrested by police at Jackson's International Airport in Port Moresby on Saturday afternoon after flying back from Brisbane where he had been stranded because of COVID-19 lockdowns. Police say the investigation surrounds the purchase of two generators from Israel for 50 million kina ($21.8 million) when Mr O'Neill was leading the country. In a statement, Assistant Commissioner of Crimes Hodges Ette alleged Mr O'Neill directed payments for the purchase of the generators without due consideration for procurement processes, without approval of parliament and without a tender process. "Mr O'Neill directed the National Executive Council to convene and approved the payment of K50 million for the generators after the purchase was made," he said. Mr O'Neill has described the case as "highly politicised" and defended the handling of the purchase. "I look forward to having my day in court soon so that the truth can prevail and this injustice corrected and exposed," he said in a statement. Mr O'Neill also questioned why current Prime Minister James Marape, who was finance minister at the time, was not being investigated. On Facebook, Mr Marape said "the work of police would not be impeded by myself as Prime Minister". He urged people to respect Mr O'Neill and the legal process. Mr O'Neill led Papua New Guinea for seven years, before quitting in 2019 after a string of high-profile resignations from his government.  Police attempted to arrest Mr O'Neill in October last year over a different issue.  He denied any wrongdoing and said it was a "political witch hunt". Police withdrew that warrant after Mr O'Neill challenged its validity in court. Police said the former prime minister will be allowed bail and will be expected to be quarantined at his own residence for the next 14 days after being interviewed, in line with current COVID-19 regulations. 
Ex-Tropical Cyclone Mangga set to bring 'once-in-a-decade' storm to Western Australia
Weather forecasters say one-third of Western Australia may receive rain due to a "once-in-a-decade" storm, as the remnants of ex-Tropical Cyclone Mangga impact the coast. A severe weather warning is in place south-west of a line from Onslow to Esperance, but the Bureau of Meteorology (BOM) said it was still too early to pinpoint exactly which towns would be most severely impacted. The worst of the incoming wild weather is forecast to hit the north-west coast this afternoon, before the storm heads further south towards Perth. BOM forecaster Jessica Lingard said wind gusts were increasing at coastal towns  including Carnarvon and Exmouth  as the leading edge of the system began to move through, and conditions were expected to worsen further south as the day continued. But Ms Lingard said a deep, low-pressure system coming in from the south was forecast to cause hazardous conditions in the south-west tonight. "We are going to expect to see a couple of smaller low-pressure systems forming off the west coast and anywhere around wherever those lows form, we'll start to see some gusts that could reach up to 130kph," Ms Lingard said. "They'll be mostly coastal locations, but we will be seeing some stronger wind gusts inland as well." Heavy rainfall of up to 100 millimetres, plus abnormally high tides, are also forecast. "We are looking to see rain across much of the western third of the state, coastal areas are obviously going to see a little bit more than those inland," Ms Lingard said. Ex-Tropical Cyclone Mangga was downgraded to a tropical low in the early hours of Saturday morning as it moved south-west of the Cocos Keeling Islands and towards WA's north-west coast. The storm is expected to produce destructive winds of up to 130 kilometres per hour, heavy rainfall and unusually high tides to over 1,000 kilometres of coastline as it travels south from Sunday morning until Monday. BOM state manager James Ashley said the breadth of the warning area was unusual, spanning from Karratha to Esperance, including Perth. "This is a really rare event for WA," he said. "Not only is it unusual for the time of year, it extends across a large part of the state." In Perth, the wet weather is forecast to continue throughout the week. Mr Ashley said it was difficult to pinpoint exactly which areas will be hardest hit by the storms. "The message is that the whole west coast is at risk with this event, we're expecting to see multiple centres," he said. "While one system might impact the northern half of the coast, another system might impact the south-west." Department of Fire and Emergency Services (DFES) acting assistant commissioner Jon Broomhall said people need to act now to secure their homes. "Normally, our storms come from the south-west," he said. "This is going to come from the north-west so it'll test people's buildings, sheds, and all those unsecured items. "We're asking people to secure property, make sure everything loose is tied down." Mr Broomhall also warned people not head out on the water. "We don't need our marine rescue volunteers' lives put at risk by people making silly decisions to go boating or surfing in these conditions." Waves along the coast are expected to reach up to 8 metres high, likely causing widespread beach erosion. Fire bans are also in place for the southern half of WA, with people told to halt any back-burning programs they had scheduled at their properties. "We don't want fires running and a storm at the same time," Mr Broomhall said. "So please, extinguish your planned burn now." Electricity distributor Western Power said its crews were preparing for potentially significant outages and disruption to the grid. "No matter what happens, we're ramping up our crews in preparation to respond to whatever this storm does produce in the way of outages," Western Power spokesman Paul Entwistle said. Specialist crews would be ready to assess any power hazards reported by the community, Mr Entwistle added. "During the storm, if you do see a fallen power line or any damage to the network, please stay 8 metres clear at least, and make the safe call to Western Power on 13 13 51," Mr Entwistle said. He also said people should check their yards for any items or branches which could be flung into power lines during the storm. With intrastate borders now open, crowds had been expected on highways leading out of Perth but the severe weather warning caused many to revise their plans. Mr Broomhall said people should avoid travelling during the storm, particularly Perth holiday-makers who had travelled to the South West. "I understand people want to get out and about but the advice is to travel home early," he said. "Absolutely try and get back home as soon as you can." Jonelle Jones, manager of the Crooked Carrot cafe on Forrest Highway south of Perth, said most customers had told her they planned to be off the road by Sunday morning before the storm hit. "[Drivers] are concerned, so they are going to go home and make sure everything is tied down," she said. While Sunday was expected to be quieter at the cafe, Ms Jones said the early part of the weekend was very busy. "Roads are back to some sort of normal," she said.  "It's amazing to see it so busy, so quickly." She said customers had been telling her they just wanted to be on the road  "just to be free again"  after travel restrictions were lifted. "There's a lot visiting family, that has probably been the biggest [reason for travel], is getting back to see their family," Ms Jones said. Mandurah resident Bev Baldwin was travelling to Margaret River and Augusta to go electric biking with her family, but decided to scale back the trip ahead of the storm. "We were thinking of going down for the weekend, but we decided not to go for the whole weekend, we're just going to go for the day," she said. "It's just nice. When you know you can't do something, you just think 'oh, but I want to do it'." No new COVID-19 cases were recorded in WA on Saturday, almost a week after restrictions were eased. There are no longer any confirmed cases in regional WA after a patient in the Goldfields recovered. There are just two active coronavirus cases left in WA  both are recovering at home in Perth. However, WA's total number of cases was revised up to 560 after three historical cases were identified through blood tests. Two of the cases, which were connected to cruise ships, had already recovered from the disease when they entered WA. The remaining case was a returned overseas traveller, who had contact with a known case and self-isolated when she became ill. The Health Department said the historical cases were no longer infectious and therefore posed no risk to the public. Latest information from the WA Health Department 
Sydney has turned into a renter's market amid the pandemic with falling prices and rising vacancies
The Sydney property market has seen rent prices in the city drop by more than $100 amid the coronavirus pandemic as renters return home or move in with others to share costs. Inner Sydney currently has a 13.8 per cent rental vacancy rate, compared with 6.5 per cent last year, the latest data from SQM Research shows. Weekly rental prices in the CBD have also fallen by more than $100-a-week, compared with the same time last year. "We've never seen anything like it," said Grant Ashby, the director of Sydney Cove Property. "In our time, it's always been a corporate market. This is the first time we've seen such a drop in rents." Property experts say as well as a drop in weekly prices across the city  known worldwide for its high cost of living  vacancies have skyrocketed. "There's more scope now in terms of vacancies for tenants to negotiate a lower rent than there has been in any time that I can remember," said Chris Martin from the City Futures Research Centre at UNSW.  For the first time in years, the market has given renters the confidence to shop around and aim big in a market that has in past years locked many people out of their ideal home. "It's definitely a renter's market," Sydneysider Tim Walker said at a Surry Hills inspection. "We're looking to get something a bit bigger and also I guess to take advantage of the savings," he said. "We've just been pretty lucky that we've found a few places that are probably a bit cheaper by, say, $100 or more, than what they'd normally be," said rental inspector Matthew Baker. "Well, what I'm paying for now, I could get a place here for the same price but so much better," Riley Ellem said after seeing a unit on York Street in the City. The changes within the market are being caused by a number of factors related to the coronavirus pandemic, including renters returning home and relationships taking the next step.  "People are moving in with other people, people are flying back overseas, if they're students, they're leaving," said Parramatta property manager Bernie Mitchell.  Living closer to the city is now an option for many who thought it would never be possible and experts say that if you are thinking of making the change, now is the time to do it. "It went quickly down, it will go quickly back up again," Grant Ashby said. For those whose income or living arrangements have been unaffected by the pandemic, one expert said cheaper rent is not off the table. "Even people who aren't technically affected by COVID can talk to their real estate agent or talk to their landlord about reducing the rent," Dr Chris Martin said. "Because the market has moved down as well."  Find out more 
China will have to be mindful of which Australian exports they target next if they don't want to hurt their own interests
There have been reports that China is considering escalating its trade war with Australia by targeting more Australian exports. Chinese officials have reportedly drawn up a list of potential goods including dairy, wine, seafood, oatmeal and fruit, that may face stricter quality checks or tariffs if political tensions don't ease. But Beijing will have to be mindful of which Australian-produced goods they target if they don't want to hurt Chinese interests. Why? Because Chinese investors own some of Australia's largest agricultural and food manufacturing companies that export to China. There is no publicly available register in Australia that shows the extent of Chinese investment in Australian-based companies. Calls to the offices of Agriculture Minister David Littleproud and Treasurer Josh Frydenberg proved fruitless. However, Professor Peter Drysdale from the Australian National University has painstakingly compiled some of the investment data by cross-checking figures from sources such as the Foreign Investment Review Board with company reports and news stories. The information is available on ANU's Chinese Investment in Australia (CHIIA) database of Mainland Chinese direct commercial investment in Australia. A separate joint project between KPMG and Sydney University helps to further reveal the extent of Chinese outbound direct investment in Australia. Here are some of examples of Chinese investment in Australia's export industries that could face uncertainty in the current trade environment. Earlier this month, China suspended imports from four of Australia's largest abattoirs  three in Queensland and one in NSW  on what Chinese authorities said was a "technical issue." The three Queensland meatworks were Kilcoy Pastoral Company, the JBS-owned Beef City, near the Queensland Darling Downs, and Dinmore near Brisbane. The NSW company was the Northern Cooperative Meat Company, in Casino. Interestingly, the Kilcoy Pastoral Company is controlled by one of China's biggest private agribusinesses, New Hope Group. In 2015, Kilcoy became part of Kilcoy Global Foods, an international conglomerate with largely Chinese backing. The news sent shockwaves through Australia's beef industry, given Australia's beef export trade jumped to $2.87 billion last year, from $1.37 billion in 2018. Chinese demand accounted for almost 25 per cent of Australian beef exports last year. There have been suggestions the suspensions placed on the four abattoirs were retribution for Australia's role in calling for an independent review into the origins of, and China's response to, the COVID-19 outbreak. Both Trade Minister Simon Birmingham and Agriculture Minister David Littleproud have denied any suggestion the move is linked to Australia's call for an inquiry. "Let me just put into perspective, one of those abattoirs is in fact partially Chinese-owned, so they've imposed this temporary ban on one of their own companies here in Australia," Mr Littleproud said earlier this week. "So I think we just need to take a calm look at these and look at them individually and make determinations from that." It's not just the beef industry that is worried. Australia's dairy industry is also watching the trade crackdown. But any moves to expand the trade restrictions to dairy products could impact Chinese-backed Australian exporters. Over the past five years, Greater China (China, Hong Kong, and Macau) has been one of the fastest-growing export markets for Australia's dairy industry. In 2018-19, it accounted for 30 per cent of Australia's dairy exports by volume (worth $1 billion), with Japan in second place with 12 per cent (worth $550 million). The Morrison Government seems to be betting that all it needs to do is hold its nerve and hold the line when it comes to China's trade threats. It is the single-largest export market for a range of Australia's dairy goods: liquid milk, milk powder, butter, even live dairy cows. With Chinese consumers becoming increasingly attracted to Australia's safe and healthy dairy products, Chinese businesses have shown a keen interest in local milk producers and dairy farms. After the 2008 baby formula scandal in China, which left as many as 300,000 infants sick and six dead, Chinese consumers turned to local manufacturers of infant formula, such as A2 and Bellamy's Australia, with sales surging to China through informal "Daigou" shopping channels. And last year, Bellamy's Australia  one of Australia's largest manufacturers of baby formula  was sold to Chinese dairy giant Mengniu for $1.5 billion. Mengniu is part-owned by the Chinese Government's China National Cereals, Oil and Foodstuffs Corporation. Mengniu also recently paid $600 million for Lion's dairy division, which includes brands under licence: Dairy Farmers, Masters and Pura milk; Big M, Dairy Farmers and Pura Classic flavoured milk; Dare and Farmers Union iced coffee; Vitasoy soy milk and coconut milk; and juice brands Daily Juice, The Juice Brothers and Berri; and Yoplait yoghurt. In 2016, Mengniu bought a 79 per cent stake in Burra Foods, one of Victoria's major dairy processors. Also in 2016, then-treasurer Scott Morrison approved the sale of Tasmanian-based dairy business Van Dieman's Land Company (VDL) to Chinese company Moon Lake for $280 million. At the time, Moon Lake outlined a plan to transport fresh milk directly from Tasmania to China on weekly flights, but by June last year no such flights had occurred. As the Chinese middle class has expanded, its taste for foreign wine has grown. China is now the world's third-largest market for imported wine, behind the United States and Germany. According to the Australian Trade and Investment Commission, Australia is the second-largest wine supplier to China after France. To put that in perspective, in 2019 Chinese wine export pioneer Warren Randall said Australian wine exports had grown from 1 million litres a year in 1997 to more than 150 million litres a year by 2019. Last year, Australian exports of wine to China reached a record $1.25 billion, an increase of 18 per cent in 12 months  almost half of the total value of Australia's $2.89 billion global wine exports. The growth of the wine market has seen Australian industry figures report growing investor interest from China in Australian vineyards. However, as with other industries, there is no publicly available list of the level of Chinese ownership in Australia's wineries. In 2018, China state media reported the country's largest wine producer, Yantai Changyu Pioneer Wine Co, bought an 80 per cent stake in Kilikanoon Estate of Adelaide, for $20.6 million, to help meet Chinese consumers' demand for wine. It said roughly 10 per cent of Kilikanoon's total output was sold to China, but that figure was expected to reach 50 per cent as production increased. By 2018, it was estimated Chinese-backed investors owned up to 10 per cent of South Australia's famous Barossa Valley winemaking region. One of those companies was Chateau Yaldara, bought by businessman Arthur Wang in 2014 for $15.5 million. Mr Wang also owns another Barossa Valley winery, 1847 Wines, which he purchased in 2010. Max's Vineyard was sold in 2018 to a Chinese-backed investor for just over $3 million, while Cimicky Wines sold for $6.6 million. In the same year, one of Australia's biggest wine industry investments in 10 years came from Weilong Wine Grape Company, which raised $120 million through a share placement to build a winery in Mildura, Victoria. Other agribusiness projects with Chinese backing include the 93,000-hectare cotton giant Cubbie Station on the Queensland-NSW border. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Agribusiness is one of the most nervous sectors watching relations sour between Beijing and Canberra. But it's not the only one. As with agribusiness though, restrictions on Australian exports across a wider range of sectors could also impact Chinese interests. This week, for instance, China revised customs rules for its iron ore imports, which prompted concern for the future of Australia's biggest export. China currently relies on Australia for two thirds of its iron ore demand to satisfy its insatiable need for steel. Years ago, it was that need for steel that prompted its investment in one of Australia's biggest mining companies, Fortescue Metals. In 2009, Hunan Valin bought into Fortescue, then Australia's third-biggest iron ore producer, for $US771 million. It has since sold down its stake, but it still has an interest in the company. Australia's coal industry has been targeted in the past by Chinese officials wanting to send a message to Canberra. Australian grain farmers have stopped sowing barley mid-stream in some paddocks as they brace for lower prices and the prospect of losing a major market in a brewing trade storm. Last year, Australian coal shipments were made to wait at Chinese ports while solutions were found through diplomatic channels over a flare-up in Sino-Australian relations. Any move against Australia's coal industry risks hurting Chinese financial interests. A major player in Australia's coal industry is Yancoal Australia, controlled by Chinese state-owned enterprise Yankuang Group. It is one of Australia's largest global thermal coal exporters, with China a key market. Trade tensions with China are not new. In recent years, Australia has walked an increasingly difficult tight-rope between economic and national interests. However, China's position as a developing nation means it is just as reliant on imports of Australian agricultural and mining products as Australia's export industry is reliant on China. Earlier this month, Prime Minister Scott Morrison said while Australia works "every day on our relationship with China" it also paid to remember it was "a mutually beneficial partnership." "And within that partnership, there are issues that need to be addressed from time to time," he said. "One of the most important things about our approach to the relationship is we're always consistent, we draw very clear lines about things that are important to us, as does the Chinese Government, and we respect their lines as we expect our lines to be respected." 
Australia joins Canada and UK in condemning China's move to 'clearly undermine' Hong Kong's autonomy
Australia has banded with the United Kingdom and Canada in describing China's plan to impose a strict national security law on Hong Kong as deeply concerning and undermining the city's autonomy. Beijing wants to introduce the legislation that would expand its ability to monitor and oversee Hong Kong's security operations and target people seeking to undermine China's authority. The proposal was raised at China's National Congress and follows the widespread protests by Hong Kong residents concerned Beijing was undermining the freedoms promised when the city was handed back to China by the UK in 1997. Australia's Foreign Minister Marise Payne, British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab and Canadian Foreign Minister Francois-Philippe Champagne have issued a statement critical of China's plan. For two decades, Beijing has been frustrated by opposition to security laws in Hong Kong. But Xi Jinping is now convinced winning local support is futile, writes Bill Birtles. "The legally binding Joint Declaration, signed by China and the United Kingdom, sets out that Hong Kong will have a high degree of autonomy," the three ministers said. "It also provides that rights and freedoms, including those of the person, of the press, of assembly, of association and others, will be ensured by law in Hong Kong and that the provisions of the two United Nations covenants on human rights  shall remain in force." The trio suggested it could be a power grab. "Making such a law on Hong Kong's behalf, without the direct participation of its people, legislature or judiciary, would clearly undermine the principle of 'One Country, Two Systems', under which Hong Kong is guaranteed a high degree of autonomy," the ministers said. Chinese officials say they may directly set up special offices in Hong Kong to oversee the city's national security efforts in the wake of last year's pro-democracy unrest. When Britain handed Hong Kong back to China in 1997, remaining citizens were promised British capitalism and laws. In the intervening years, some argue that Beijing has squandered its promises. A state-controlled news agency accused the city's pro-democracy opposition of having "schemed with external forces in attempts to create a 'colour revolution'". Beijing has repeatedly alleged that the pro-democracy camp was receiving support from the CIA in the United States, as well as other foreign governments. A Chinese official said the National Congress was exercising its "constitutional power" to set up a new legal framework and enforcement mechanism to ensure national security in Hong Kong. Activists say the new laws could be a knockout blow for Hong Kong's one country, two systems deal with China. 
'Complete inaccuracies': Viral Facebook post about COVID-19 tests debunked
CoronaCheck is RMIT ABC Fact Checks regular email newsletter dedicated to fighting the misinformation infodemic surrounding the coronavirus outbreak. You can read the latest edition below, and subscribe to have the next newsletter delivered straight to your inbox. A couple of weeks ago we reported a story on Clive Palmer and his claimthat the use of the drug hydroxychloroquine had been a major factor in the Australia's low number of COVID-19 deaths. He made that claim after announcing he'd bought 33 million doses of the drug to donate to Australia's medical stockpile. We've now fact checked that claim, and found itto be baseless. We've also looked at a claim made by Agriculture Minister David Littleproud that Australia has the "most secure food security in the world". We found that claimto be in the ballpark. Also investigated by us this week: a Facebook post attributed to the Department of Health claims common coronavirus tests can't distinguish COVID-19 from other illnesses. The Department told us that was incorrect. A postshared widely on Facebookand attributed to the Department of Health claims that tests for the novel coronavirus, known as SARS-COV-2, are not able to distinguish the virus from other illnesses. "It should be noted that PCR tests cannot distinguish between "live" virus and non-infective RNA,"the post states. "This means the test cannot [distinguish] covid from a cold or measles or ebola." As Australian Medical Association ACT President Antonio Di Dio explained to the ABCin March, Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) tests are the most widely used COVID-19 tests in Australia, and work by taking a "fingerprint" of RNA from a patient. "In the context of COVID-19, you get a piece of the RNA from a swab of the patient, you double it, then again and again,"Dr Di Dio said. "Until you have millions of copies." Within a few hours, the sample would be large enough to see whether COVID-19 is present. A caption alongside the Facebook post claims the information has been taken "from [the Department of Healths] own website". In a statement, a department spokesman told RMIT ABC Fact Check the post contained "selectively chosen information taken out of context" from afactsheet for clinicians, along with "complete inaccuracies". "The factsheet is actually dealing with COVID-19 positive people continuing to test positive after the infectious period has passed,"the spokesman said. "It is true that the PCR may still result in a positive test, because of remaining non-infectious viral load within the patient." He said the test would not detect any pathogen other than the SARS-COV-2 virus. Touted by some as a miracle cure for COVID-19, the anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine was thrust into the spotlight again this week when US President Donald Trumprevealedhe was taking it to avoid contracting the illness. Billionaire businessman Clive Palmer says Australia has given credit to hydroxychloroquine for Australia's low coronavirus death rate. The drug recently made headlines in Australia when outspoken businessman Clive Palmer donated almost 33 million doses reportedlymore than the equivalent of entire US stocks  to Australias national medical stockpile. In a series of newspaper ads and TV interviews, Mr Palmer claimed hydroxychloroquine was behind Australias low mortality rate, which he said had fallen since the drug was made available to treat hospitalised coronavirus patients in early April. But can Australias success be linked to the drug?Fact Check asked the experts andfound Mr Palmers claim to be baseless. In fact, the drug was already available to hospital patients, and experts said the death curve had flattened because just a few weeks earlier the case curve had done the same. The jury is still out on whether the drug works as a treatment for COVID-19. However, the evidence isn't promising. Given the known risks of hydroxychloroquine, Australia's medicines regulatory body strongly advises against giving it to coronavirus patients in the absence of positive clinical trial results. It feels like ancient history, but for a time, just a few short weeks ago, supermarket shelves normally filled with toilet paper, pasta, flour and cleaning supplies were bare and the Prime Minister labelled the apparent cause, panic buying, "ridiculous" and "not sensible". Agriculture Minister David Littleproud says that Australia has "the most secure food security in the world". Despite those scenes, federal Agriculture Minister David Littleproud recently declared that Australia had "the most secure food security in the world". "We're a nation of 25 million people," Mr LittleproudtoldABC Radio National's Afternoon Briefing program on May 11. "We produce enough food for 75 million." In afact check published earlier this week, we found that claim to be in the ballpark. Many studies and experts say Australia enjoys a very high level of food security, exports far more than it needs and has ample alternative sources of certain foods should they become scarce. In terms of Australia's international ranking, we're not quite the most food secure nation but one comparison places us 12th among 113 countriesin terms of food security. NewsGuard, a self-described "internet trust tool", has published a listof Twitter "super spreaders"  accounts that "repeat, share and amplify" coronavirus misinformation and myths to large numbers of followers. The 10 accounts listed by NewsGuard reach a combined 3.3 million followers and have continued to publish misinformation despite Twitterannouncinga crackdown on March 18 in a bid to address the so-called "infodemic". Included in the list are the accounts of former Nigerian politician Femi Fani-Kayode, conservative radio commentator Bill Mitchell and former British footballer David Icke. The accounts have propagated myths including that COVID-19 does not exist and that zinc or herbal remedies can prevent or cure the virus, and are spreading unproven claims about the effect of 5G technology on the virus. Misinformation about Bill Gates and his involvement in global public health seems to spread exponentially with each passing day, with the billionaire tech founder and philanthropist the alleged 'villain'in a number of convoluted coronavirus conspiracy theories. This week, fact checkers atIndia Todayfound that a photo of Mr Gates and top US infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci apparently flaunting social distancing and face mask rules was taken in December 2018, long before the coronavirus outbreak. Another claim linking the men, which suggested that Dr Fauci served on Microsofts board of directors, was found to be false byAP Fact Check. Though not related to the coronavirus, a rumour has also been spread online that Mr Gates visited disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein's private island multiple times. That claim, too, is false, according toReuters. Meanwhile,Politifactfound that the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation was not set to make a profit from the development of a coronavirus vaccine, whileReutersfound that Mr Gates did not present to the Pentagon a plan to immunise religious fanatics. Speaking of religion,Reutersalso found Mr Gates had not advocated for the permanent banning of religious gatherings. Melinda Gates has also been the victim of online rumours, including a claim, debunked bySnopes, that she wore a satanic symbol during a TV interview. US President Donald Trump this week claimed that he had been taking hydroxychloroquine as a COVID-19 preventative, prompting scorn from political adversaries including House of Representatives Speaker Nancy Pelosi, a Democrat. "He's our president, and I would rather he not be taking something that has not been approved by the scientists, especially in his age group and, shall we say, his weight group,[which] is morbidly obese, they say,"Ms Pelositold CNN. While her comments weremet with gleeby some, othershave accused her of"fat shaming". But was her comment accurate? Not quite, according to fact checkers atPolitiFact, who found that based on figures from Mr Trump's latest physical examination he would not be considered "morbidly obese"bymedical standards. Weighing in at 243 pounds (110 kilograms) and measuring 6 feet 3 inches (191 centimetres), Mr Trump just falls into the obese category. And while some pundits have questioned the official height and weight figures provided by Mr Trump, PolitiFact found that he would need to be shorter than 5 feet 8 inches (173 centimetres) and weigh 260 pounds (118 kilograms) to be classified"morbidly obese". Got a fact that needs checking? Tweet us@ABCFactCheckor send us an email atfactcheck@rmit.edu.au 
COVID-19 worries and study stress 'just not healthy' for HSC students, but there are signs of resilience
Uncertainty has been one of the most challenging hallmarks of COVID-19 for Year 12 student Olivia Condon. During the hours spent in online lessons, the 17-year-old found it impossible to stop her mind from worrying about the future. "I felt really anxious, thinking 'Am I going to get a bad mark, when are we going back to school?'," she said. "My mind was constantly asking questions I couldn't answer." She is one of thousands of high school students across the country dealing with a global pandemic while preparing for the most important exams of their young lives. Youth workers say instances of self-harm and suicidal thoughts have risen significantly among young people in recent months. While some students have remained resilient, the upheaval has prompted calls for education providers to focus more on wellbeing than marks. For Olivia, the low point came shortly after she stopped going to classes in early April. "It was really hard to keep doing work because stress just kept piling up and you didn't get a break, you were stressed but you still had to do the work," she said. She also worried about classmates with difficult home lives. "The only thing that kept them going was school and seeing their friends, so COVID had such a negative impact for them," she said. The coronavirus outbreak has caused an unprecedented increase in demand for mental health support services for young people. The Kids Helpline reported a 40 per cent rise in demand for counselling services in March. Project Youth supports at-risk young people in Sydney's south with crisis accommodation, employment, and respite from troubles at home. Operations manager Kevin Crowe said the amount of young people needing assistance had never been greater, with referrals coming from as far away as Victoria. "It's been a nightmare to be honest," he said. "We've had a big increase in anxiety and depression  suicidal ideation and self-harming. "We've had an increase in referrals, especially for kids under 16 who are not able to stay at home  it's quite frightening actually."  Despite efforts to provide online tutoring, Mr Crowe said many students trying to complete their secondary education will drop out due to complications caused by COVID-19. "They're falling through the gaps, which is very sad," he said.  It's an escalation that did not surprise Will Stubley from Year 13, an organisation that helps young people transition from school to adult life. In recent months, his staff have been inundated with concerned students looking for clarity in their final year. Mr Stubley said the focus on academia in the final years of high school forced an unhealthy amount of pressure onto young people. "Adding COVID on top, it's just not healthy  that stress and anxiety is not necessarily warranted," he said. Despite the upheaval, there are signs that students are learning to better support each other. Year 12 student Jakub Kamen said the time away from school had taught him the value of reaching out to those who were struggling. "I definitely noticed more people have been down in the dumps, so I would check on a few people, ask how they were going," he said. "You've got to make sure people around you are OK and let them know you're there for them." Olivia said she had also been more emotionally open with her classmates. "Since being at home I've found it so important to check up on people, even if you didn't talk to them much before," she said. "It's been a positive response, I've made friends with people I wouldn't necessarily be close with before." It was a pleasing response for Mr Stubley, who hoped that COVID-19 shutdowns would reinforce the importance of student welfare over marks. "School helps young people become an independent contributor to society and that has come much more to the fore now," he said. "The emphasis has shifted to 'How can we help these young people navigate the period after school?' "That should be the focus anyway." 
Why Annastacia Palaszczuk could win political points in the Queensland-NSW border brawl
Queenslanders don't like being told what to do, especially by their southern neighbours. So it's no surprise we saw a terse and frustrated Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk hit back at pressure from New South Wales leader Gladys Berejiklian to reopen the border  citing NSW's more than 300 active coronavirus cases, compared to Queensland's 12. Latest information from Queensland Health. Ms Palaszczuk has repeatedly said she based her decisions on medical advice to stop NSW and Victorian travellers bringing the illness to the Sunshine State. It seems border closures are far less useful when you're a net exporter of the virus, compared to a net importer. The Premier's choices have been wedged in a tighter political position than usual, with Queensland's October state election creeping closer. Opponents have argued the economic fallout of the pandemic would be extenuated by the border shut-down and commentators suggest the Premier has backed herself into a corner that will result in polling pain.  Ms Palaszczuk has taken the position there could be unspeakable damage to the economy, perhaps irreversible, if a second wave were to enter from southern states through opened borders. And Labor knows, at the moment, it has the political capital on its side, especially in must-win regional areas. There's a shared opinion among some regional communities on the reluctance to wind back a restriction that kept areas completely COVID-19-free. Carpentaria Mayor Jack Bawden seconded the Premier's hard-line border stance. "We should keep them closed  the further we can keep this bloody virus away from the community, the happier we are," Cr Bawden said. Diamantina Mayor Rob Dare fell in line with the general consensus backing Ms Palaszczuk's southern shutdown. "I agree with her  it seems to be all the cases are in New South Wales and Victoria, so I agree with her stance at the moment," Cr Dare said. Even Gold Coast Mayor Tom Tate, who is an advocate for large parts of the tourism industry that have been savaged by coronavirus, has publicly endorsed the stand. And it's not like Queensland's isolation attempt is different from many other states, including locked-up South Australia, Western Australia, Northern Territory and Tasmania, which all have closed borders. Two recent Queensland cases have spooked authorities, who know how easily the hard work could be undone. The Rockhampton nurse whose actions had the potential to  and still could  cause a mass outbreak amongst our most vulnerable, and another case from this week of a woman who was diagnosed with the virus two months after returning from India. Both cases reinforce how tenuous Queensland's hold is on the situation. And it was just two months ago when Queensland was on the precipice of a catastrophic explosion and COVID-19 case numbers were doubling every three days. In the words of Queensland's Chief Health Officer Jeannette Young, it was terrifying. Now that cases have dramatically slowed here, at least one Opposition MP used State Parliament to proclaim "the worst has passed" in their pursuit of relaxing the lockdown measures. But health leaders have been at pains to explain the curve hasn't flattened in Queensland because the virus is gone  it's simply that it's not being spread because of the stringent restrictions. Some LNP insiders admit their regions are expressing the desire to keep our southern neighbours locked out  at least for now. So why has the top tier of the LNP used its public time this week to criticise the Government's decision? The usual political playbook reads that when the Government says something is black, the Opposition claims it's white. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. But over the pandemic months, we've mostly seen a departure from the usual script, to present one united team  locally and nationally. Now, as the days dwindle down towards the election, that cooperative veneer is slipping. LNP Opposition Leader Deb Frecklington, while criticising the Government's decision, also said she would listen to the health advice. It's a pretty glaring contradiction from the LNP that indicates there's little room for unity politics in an election campaign. There is, of course, a risk the sentiment could turn against the Premier as the days of few coronavirus cases continue. But it's plainly irrational the Premier would persist with border closures if they weren't absolutely essential. And Ms Palaszczuk would be banking on the wider support of Queenslanders to back her over her southern counterpart. 
Interest-only loan reprieve coming as banks try to avoid a financial storm, but investors fear it's not enough
One of Australia's major banks has offered relief to thousands of property investors who hold interest-only home loans, responding to claims the industry is not doing enough to stave off a potential property crisis. Westpac has pledged to extend borrowers' interest-only periods after WA Senator Dean Smith criticised the industry for failing to support landlords, many of whom are self-funded retirees, who were struggling with higher repayments due to their loans switching to principal and interest. Senator Smith said he would canvas support for a Senate inquiry into the banks' treatment of property investors after hearing disturbing stories of financial hardship. He said he feared investors pushed to the wall could lead to a worst-case scenario of a "tsunami of forced sales". Westpac has now confirmed borrowers can apply to extend the interest-only periods of their loans for up to a year, instead of being forced to start paying the principal of their loans when it expires. "This includes allowing interest-only customers to extend their loan term for up to 12 months or customers on principal and interest repayments to switch to interest-only repayments for the same period," Will Ranken, Westpac's general manager of home ownership, said. "We recognise that COVID-19 has had a significant impact on household finances and these changes will provide affected customers with more flexibility with their home loan repayments during this time." For Adelaide couple Dianne and Brian McShane, whose loans are with a different bank, Westpac's statement offered little hope. The self-funded retirees were already struggling with their loan repayments before coronavirus hit and now their tenants on the Gold Coast have had to break their lease due to the pandemic. Ms McShane, a former administrative assistant, and her husband, an ex-electrician, started investing in property 20 years ago to try to fund their retirement. They currently have three investment properties, two in Queensland and one in Western Australia. But instead of earning an income from them, the couple in their 60s are paying $9,000 a month to the bank to cover their loans, which switched from interest-only to principal and interest last year. Mr McShane said the couple were running out of funds and would ultimately be forced to sell in the falling housing market. "There will come a day when we are going to run out of money because we are paying all this principal and we'll have to sell everything, and we'll have nothing left," he said. "And we'll have to rely on the pension. "And that's the reason why we invested in property  we didn't want to be a burden." The couple said they asked their bank 12 months ago if they could retain their interest-only terms, but that their application was rejected because they were no longer in the workforce.  They said the bank rang them earlier this week to indicate that they could apply for a new loan, but the pair had little confidence that it will be approved. Sydney investor Mike Scotland, a former school teacher, owes $1.1 million to the banks and is in a similar predicament. Mr Scotland has six investment properties and all the loans have switched to principal and interest. "The rationale was that there is no way to gain wealth in Australia unless you invent a better mousetrap, win the lottery, have a brilliant business or maybe you do a bit of investment," he said. "People think property investors are multi-millionaires but probably about 40 per cent of them never make a profit. "They're not rich, fat cats, they're just people trying to get ahead for the most part." Mr Scotland said all of his properties had either fallen in value or flat-lined, while rents had also dropped. He envisaged he would have to sell in eight or nine months' time, at a loss. "So I'm heading towards a deadline, I'm heading towards a cliff," he said. "The banks are putting a lot of pressure on the economy, that's really the situation." Westpac's policy is in line with recent advice from the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) that the banks could extend interest-only terms during the COVID-19 pandemic and it would not trigger responsible lending obligations. Chief economist with REA group Nerida Conisbee said property investors would be most affected by the COVID downturn because of the impact on the rental market from job losses. But she said it was in the banks' interests to support their customers through the difficult times.  "I can't see it happening that the banks would allow wholesale default of loans or wholesale distress in the property market by forcing people to sell to pay back debt," she said. "The banks are well capitalised. "It is not in their interest for people to start defaulting on loans or sell their properties at a loss." Ms Conisbee said crunch time for the housing market would come when borrowers, including investors, reached the end of the leniency period for mortgage deferrals the banks had introduced. "The big concern now is what happens after that six months," she said. Banking analyst Brett Le Mesurier said the banks had already offered considerable relief to mortgagees, granting relief from paying interest. "It is not like they are taking a hard approach to their customers," he said. "They are actually taking the most sympathetic approach they have ever taken, but of course there are obviously examples that this Senator is aware of where customers are not getting the sort of relief from the major banks that others are. "The danger for the banks granting a lot of relief to people is that you are just creating more problems for the future." NAB issued a statement saying it had a team contacting customers approaching the end of their interest-only terms to work with them on the "right solution, which can include restructuring a loan if required". This included a fast-tracked process for customers with interest-only loans due to expire in the next six months to extend their interest-only period for a year, but this would not apply to borrowers who had reached their maximum interest-only term.   ANZ did not respond to the question of extending interest-only loan periods but said customers could request a repayment deferral on their home loan for up to six months and this included investors paying interest only. The bank said 105-thousand home loan customers had sought assistance. Senator Dean Smith said he welcomed the prospect of more flexibility by the banks, providing the application process for borrowers was not onerous, and requests for extensions were actually granted. "It's encouraging to see one of Australia's major lending institutions change its policy towards the extension of interest-only loans, but these changes now need to be made industry-wide," he said. "I again call on the entire Australian banking and finance sector to extend interest-only loan repayments until the pandemic's financial fallout has passed." 
Australia's coronavirus recovery has many competing values on the table
Half the workforce is now receiving either the JobSeeker or JobKeeper payment. The Australian Government is pumping more cash into the economy as a percentage of GDP than nearly any other country.  And now Josh Frydenberg has declared "there is no money tree". It may sound like an odd declaration from a Treasurer who had no problem whistling up hundreds of billions of dollars in a matter of weeks, but the point Frydenberg is trying to make is that the spending cannot continue. When six months of support payments are up, that's it. The Government will go no further. It will then rely on the Coalition's cupboard of policy "principles and values" to shift nearly 7 million Australians from support payments back into sustainable jobs. Just before he coughed up a lung at the dispatch box on Tuesday, the Treasurer spoke of the "proven path" for growing the economy.  "The values and the principles that have guided Coalition reforms in the past must guide us again in the future," Frydenberg said, listing tax and workplace reform, cutting red tape and upskilling as sure-fire ways to generate some growth. It's too early to know where the Government will land on the specifics here, but perhaps we should look at the Coalition's reform legacy as a guide, given the Treasurer's invitation to do so. The reform record is a patchy one, with a few unhappy memories many on the Coalition side would no doubt rather forget. There were the attempts to deregulate university fees, introduce a GP co-payment, establish a National Energy Guarantee and cut the company tax rate for big business. Each of these ideas bit the dust in the face of internal or opposition resistance.  On other fronts the Coalition has had more success: trimming superannuation perks, cutting income taxes and lowering company tax for smaller firms. In different ways, these successful and unsuccessful measures all involved a smaller role for government.  It's no coincidence that the Prime Minister now talks about a "business-led recovery" rather than a government one. The Coalition hasn't always been able to get its way, but it's maintained a consistent principle of looking for a smaller role for the state. The past few months have been quite the anomaly. The Government is now playing a far bigger role in the economy than ever before, but as it eyes the recovery, the Prime Minister and Treasurer want it known the various support payments for workers, the unemployed, childcare services, pensioners and apprentices are only temporary. By contrast, Anthony Albanese sees an ongoing need for big government, warning against the "law of the jungle and unfettered market forces" as Australia charts its path to recovery.  In a speech to caucus on Monday, the Labor leader pointed to the ALP's "values of fairness, security and the power of government to change lives" as the best way forward. So what reform ideas have these Labor values produced in recent years? We've seen ambitious plans to super-charge spending on education, health, dental care and childcare. All of this was to be paid for by stripping back negative gearing and franking credit tax breaks and increasing tax on the highest income earners.  The problem is, voters didn't like it. At least not enough to stop them punishing Labor with three consecutive election defeats. Since becoming Opposition Leader 12 months ago, Anthony Albanese has been contemplating how to adjust Labor's policy mix. He's been criticised for moving too slowly, but it's probably a good thing he didn't settle on any fixed positions before the game-changing COVID crisis came along.  Now he has an opportunity to weigh up what the post-COVID economy needs and what voters want. It's still far too early to know exactly what the economy will look like as restrictions are eased; which businesses will be viable, what might happen to the global economy and whether the trade relationship with China will recover or continue to deteriorate.  Specific reform proposals are unlikely to emerge from either side until the lay of the land is clearer. Right now, we have competing "values". The Coalition wants a business-led recovery, Labor prefers an ongoing government-led path to growth. The Eden-Monaro by-election may provide some clues as to whether voters have a preference. David Speers is the host of Insiders, which airs on ABC TV at 9am on Sunday or on iview. 
NT coronavirus restrictions continue to lift, with pubs, gyms and beauty salons reopening
The Northern Territory has continued to ease its tough COVID-19 restrictions  allowing pubs, gyms, cafes and nail salons to reopen with extra hygiene measures and two-hour time limits in place. Darwin proprietor Jason Hanna owns several eateries across the Top End including The Deck Bar, Chow, Lazy Susan's and Good Times Bar & Grill. Mr Hanna has been up since 3:00am trying to get some of his restaurants ready to reopen at midday and expects Territorians to come out en masse to support local businesses and quench their thirst. "I think I might not have ordered enough beer [although] we've got buckets of corona on special all day, just to dig it in," he said. "We've got our poor brethren down in places like New South Wales that are allowed to have 10 people in a venue, here we can have 10 people on one table. "We are pretty blessed up here, the weather's 26C nice and cool, the beers flowing and the kitchens ready to go." Northern Territory Chief Minister Michael Gunner said he was excited about the 3,000 people who were back at work on Friday. Industry peak body Hospitality NT said about 450 food and drink venues reopened across the Territory, with more expected to open on June 5 in the third stage of restrictions easing. Mr Gunner thanked Territorians for listening to health advice and making the NT the "safest place in Australia". "It's been 53 days and I think you've all deserved that beer," he said.  Shenannigans, one of the bars on Darwin's popular drinking mile Mitchell Street, booked out completely by opening time at midday.  Sydneysider Charlotte Dubois was among the first to the bar. She said she'd been in Darwin six weeks and due to coronavirus, this was her first chance at a pint in the Top End town. "I can't wait to shove it in my Sydney friends' faces," she said. Bruce Masters said he finished up work early to be at the pub when it opened. "The beer always tastes good. But it's good to be out," he said.  "The plan for today is to enjoy socialising. "What the boss doesn't know doesn't hurt him." Lincoln Jenkins is the Northern Territory sales manager at Carlton and United Breweries.  Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Roughly 175,000 litres of beer have been delivered to the Northern Territory in the last week and Mr Jenkins assured Territorians there would definitely be enough tap beer to last the weekend.  "There will be plenty out there, we won't be running out," he said. "There's enough beer here for what we think is the next two to three weeks." Mr Jenkins said the NT was the "envy of the rest of the country" as pubs reopened and thousands of hospitality workers returned to work. While NT Police Commissioner Jamie Chalker said it was an "exciting day" for the Territory, but he also warned drivers to be safe on the roads.  Commissioner Chalker said there would be a strong police presence in busy centres and parks  and motorists could expect random breath tests. "We really don't want to see a spike in the road toll, and we certainly don't want to see a spike in poor road behaviour," he said.  "Just hit it with a little bit of common sense and appreciate the very rare circumstances we've been able to create in our own 'big bubble' and appreciate it and enjoy it but not risk it. NT Chief Health Officer Hugh Heggie, who joined Commissioner Chalker on a patrol down Mitchell St on Friday afternoon, said most people were doing the right thing.  "The pleasure though this time of the year, when Darwin is such a lovely place to be, and in a premises here, to see people, families, friends, work colleagues in their bubbles, social networks together," he said.  "I can see the enthusiasm and I hope people behave responsibly.  "Everything I've seen is just wonderful, premises and businesses have done this really well." 
The NBA is in discussions with Disney over a potential season restart at the company's Florida complex
The NBA is in talks with The Walt Disney Company on a single-site option for a resumption of play in Central Florida in late July, the clearest sign yet that the league believes the season can continue amid the coronavirus pandemic. The National Basketball Players Association is also part of the talks with Disney. Games would be held at the ESPN Wide World of Sports Complex, a massive campus on the Disney property near Orlando. NBA spokesman Mike Bass said the conversations were still "exploratory", and that the site would be used not only for games but for practices and housing as well. "Our priority continues to be the health and safety of all involved, and we are working with public health experts and government officials on a comprehensive set of guidelines to ensure that appropriate medical protocols and protections are in place," Bass said. The ESPN Wide World of Sports Complex is a 103-hectare campus with multiple arenas that could host games simultaneously and has been home to, among other things, the Junior NBA World Championship in recent years. ESPN is primarily owned by Disney, one of the NBA's broadcast partners. Space won't be an issue, even if Major League Soccer  which is also in talks to resume its season at Disney  is there at the same time as the NBA. Nearly 24,000 hotel rooms owned or operated by Disney are situated within the campus. The NBA suspended its season on March 11, becoming the first of the US major pro leagues to do so after it became known All-Star centre Rudy Gobert of the Utah Jazz tested positive for COVID-19. The list of NBA players known to test positive eventually grew to 10  not all were identified  and commissioner Adam Silver said last month the actual total was even higher. But the league has been working on countless return-to-play scenarios for several weeks, all with the caveat that testing would be an integral part of any resumption of the season. Teams have been allowed to welcome players back to their training facilities for voluntary sessions since May 8, and more than half of the league's franchises have taken advantage of that opportunity. The next steps would likely include a loosening of the restrictions for those voluntary workouts  no more than four players are currently allowed inside any facility at a time  and then a plan for when training camps could open. If the league plans to resume play in late July, then camps conceivably could open around the start of that month. AP 
The Australian share market falls, miners rise as iron ore drives a record trade surplus in March
The Australian share market has closed lower, dragged down by the major banks, but mining stocks have risen after iron ore exports contributed to a record trade surplus in March. The ASX 200 ended down by 0.4 per cent at 5,364 points, while the All Ordinaries index lost 0.3 per cent to 5,449. The major bank stocks all fell sharply, including Westpac (-2.3 per cent), NAB (-2.2 per cent), ANZ (-2.2 per cent) and Commonwealth Bank (-1.8 per cent). Energy stocks also weighed on the broader market, with falls for Oil Search (-2.7 per cent), Santos (-1.9 per cent) and Woodside (-1.4 per cent). Mining stocks lifted in afternoon trade, including BHP (+1.9 per cent) and Fortescue (+1.7 per cent), while Rio Tinto finished in the red (-0.6 per cent). It followed a surge in iron ore exports, which rose by around a third in March as some Chinese factories reopened. The Bureau of Statistics says Australia posted a record trade surplus in the month as exports rose while imports fell due to the coronavirus pandemic hitting global supply chains. Exports jumped by 15 per cent or just over $5.5 billion, seasonally adjusted, to $42.4 billion, with a rise in shipments of iron ore, coal, gold and meat. "We think some of the rise in iron ore exports reflects catch-up demand from the previous month, which saw a week of limited shipping activity due to Cyclone Damien," ANZ economists said. Services exports, such as tourism and education, dropped by 9 per cent or nearly $730 million. Income from travel dropped by $657 million, while income from travel-related services was down $734 million in the month. That was offset by a 4 per cent, or nearly $1.2 billion, fall in imports, in particular, travel and transport services. There was a also a drop in aircraft imports over the month, leaving a record trade surplus of $10.6 billion in March, an increase of $6.7 billion from February. The Australian dollar gained some ground, to about 64.4 US cents. Private employers in the US laid off a record 20.2 million workers last month as a forced shutdown of business to stem the COVID-19 outbreak savaged the economy. The ADP National Employment Report suggested that lockdowns in the US to slow the spread of the coronavirus could leave lasting scars on the economy. In addition, the figures for March were revised up to show private payrolls falling by 149,000 jobs over the month. That is instead of the previously reported 27,000 and is the first decline since September 2017. Chris Rupkey, chief economist at MUFG in New York, said the latest numbers indicated a deep economic downturn. "One thing for sure is that this pandemic health crisis has produced depression-magnitude job losses, which means this recovery is going to take longer than many are thinking," he said. "The Great Depression lasted three-and-a-half years, and it will be a miracle if the economy gets anywhere near back to normal within the next couple of years." More companies announced layoffs overnight, including ridesharing firm Uber, which plans to sack 3,700 employees. The cuts to its customer support and recruiting teams represent about 14 per cent of its nearly 27,000 employees. Uber chief executive Dara Khosrowshahi will also forgo his base salary for the rest of the year. His salary was $US1 million ($1.56 million) in 2019. Uber said the cost of redundancies would be around $US20 million. Mr Khosrowshahi said in a letter to staff that "days like this are brutal" and indicated there could be more job cuts to come. Rideshare rival Lyft announced a loss of $US398.1 million from sales of $US956 million, which was better than expected. The number of active users taking a Lyft trip fell over the first few months of 2020 compared to the last few months of 2019. Yesterday, accommodation sharing giant Airbnb announced that a quarter of its global workforce was being laid off. Meanwhile, another Amazon worker has died from coronavirus, according to CNBC. The employee, who worked at an Amazon warehouse in the US Mid-West, passed away on April 18 and his last day at the facility was on March 19. The death comes after Amazon warehouse employees raised concerns that the company was not doing enough to protect them from catching COVID-19 at work. As digital giants come under fire for misinformation about coronavirus on their platforms, Facebook has announced the first 20 members of its oversight board. The board is an independent body that can overturn the company's content moderation decisions. The members include former editor-in-chief of The Guardian newspaper Alan Rusbridger, retired judge and former European Court of Human Rights vice-president Andras Sajo, and law professor Nicolas Suzor from the Queensland University of Technology. On the markets, the Dow Jones index fell for first time in three days in a late sell-off on the job layoff news. The Dow lost 0.9 per cent to 23,665. The broader S&P 500 fell 0.7 per cent to 2,848.42 and the Nasdaq Composite added 45 points, or half a per cent, to 8,854. The US Treasury Department will launch a 20-year bond and increase securities auction sizes across a range of bonds to raise cash amid record US Government borrowing as it battles the coronavirus. Stocks in Europe ended mainly in the red, with Germany's DAX and the CAC 40 in France losing more than 1 per cent. The FTSE 100 index bucked the trend and rose 0.07 per cent to 5,854 as Prime Minister Boris Johnson said his Government was considering lifting some coronavirus restrictions as soon as Monday. West Texas crude oil dropped 2 per cent to $US24.05 a barrel. Spot gold fell below $US1,700 to nearly $US1,686 an ounce. 
Europe to endure economic shock akin to Great Depression due to coronavirus, finance chiefs say
The collective European economy will contract by 7.7 per cent and inflation in the eurozone will almost disappear this year because of the COVID-19 pandemic, the European Commission forecast on Wednesday. Public debt and budget deficits are also expected to balloon because of economic hardship brought on by the health crisis. "Europe is experiencing an economic shock without precedent since the Great Depression," European Commissioner for Economic and Financial Affairs Paolo Gentiloni said. "Both the depth of the recession and the strength of recovery will be uneven, conditioned by the speed at which lockdowns can be lifted, the importance of services like tourism in each economy and by each country's financial resources." The commission forecast that, as the economy contracts this year, consumer prices will almost stagnate.  The inflation rate will slow to 0.2 per cent in 2020, before accelerating to 1.1 per cent next year, when the eurozone returns to growth of 6.3 per cent. Investment will plunge 13.3 per cent this year, the forecast states. The effort to keep economies alive will boost budget deficits in the eurozone to an aggregate 8.5 per cent of GDP this year, from 0.6 per cent last year, before the gap shrinks to 3.5 per cent in 2021. Coronavirus questions answeredBreaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast.Read moreA surge in public debt, however, will take longer to undo, the commission said, forecasting that eurozone debt will jump to 102.7 per cent of GDP this year from 86 per cent last year. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Italy, Greece, Spain and Portugal will be among the hardest hit, while Luxembourg, Malta and Austria are to weather the shock better. Greek GDP is to contract the most, by 9.7 per cent, with Italy recording the second deepest recession of 9.5 per cent and Spain 9.4 per cent. The budget deficit of Italy, the EU country suffering the most deaths due to coronavirus, will also surge the most  to 11.1 per cent of GDP this year, from 1.6 per cent last year, before falling to 5.6 per cent in 2021, the commission forecast. Find out moreSpain's deficit will top 10 per cent this year, up from 2.8 per cent in 2019, with France close behind at 9.9 per cent. Italy's public debt will also record the biggest increase this year, to 158.9 per cent per cent of GDP, from 134.8 per cent in 2019.  Reuters 
Coronavirus distancing restrictions to ease across Queensland for Mother's Day
Queensland will again ease COVID-19 contact restrictions from Mother's Day this Sunday to allow up to five members from one household to visit another home. "We don't think that will increase risk. It's about one household going to another household," Chief Medical Officer Jeannette Young said. But Dr Young urged people to maintain their distance when visiting other people and to avoid hugging or getting too close "wherever possible". "If you've got different households coming together, try to keep that social distance," she said. "So yes, when you go and visit, because we all want to keep our mums safe  I know I do  it's a good idea to just delay those hugs until we get through all this. "Within a household, of course hug each other but if you've got different households coming together, try and maintain that social distance, it's just being extra cautious but very appropriate." Multiple families can visit the same household as long as it is as different times. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said the easing of restrictions from Mother's Day was happening because "Queensland has been doing such a great job". "I really want to thank Queenslanders for a great job that they have been doing right across our state and I think this is going to be welcomed by families, especially on Mother's Day, starting this Sunday," Ms Palaszczuk said. Latest information from Queensland Health. Dr Young said the 50-kilometre limit on travel would also be lifted "if you're visiting another household". "But you can't go outinto that community. You can only goto that residence, visit there, andleave," Dr Young said.  Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "You can't go shopping, you can't go to the beach." Dr Young said there were two new cases of COVID-19 confirmed overnight, and that 4,665 Queenslander had been tested in the past 24 hours. Both new cases were on the Gold Coast, one of them linked to a cruise ship. Dr Young said Queensland only had 50 active cases, eight of whom were in hospital. She said despite a "few little breakouts" with the first easing of restrictions last weekend, people were getting the message. "All of these things are dependent on people hearing the message and continuing to do the great job they've done," Dr Young said. "If all of a sudden we end up with a lot of problems or a lot of cases, then we'd have to rethink, but I expect that won't happen. "This is all part of our strategy to get society, as much as possible, back to as much as it can do. "It won't be where we were pre-COVID, that won't happen for quite a while down the track, but we'll gradually see things moving back towards normal business". The Premier was due to meet with representatives from the hospitality industry on Thursday.  But she said a decision about reopening cafes, bars, restaurants and clubs would depend on advice from Friday's National Cabinet meeting. 
Nobel Prize winner 'greatly saddened' his name used to spread COVID-19 misinformation
As the world grapples with an unprecedented health crisis, it is now more important than ever to ensure that the information we share is accurate and fact-based. Fake news and misinformation seem to be spreading as fast and as far as the virus itself, infecting our newsfeeds and timelines at this crucial moment. For this reason, RMIT ABC Fact Check has launched CoronaCheck, an email newsletter in which we will bring you the latest in fact-checking from around the world in relation to the coronavirus. You can read the latest edition below, and subscribe to have the next newsletter delivered straight to your inbox. Manyreaders have asked usaboutcommentssupposedlymade byNobel laureate Tasuku Honjo. We begin today's editionby setting the record straight on ProfessorHonjo'sstance on the source of the novel coronavirus. We've also turned our attention to Madagascar, where the country's president has been spruiking a herbal tea, and to France, where protective gowns that disintegrated when usedhad apparently been importedfrom China. Social media posts claiming that Nobel laureate Tasuku Honjo said the novel coronavirus was "not natural" and "manufactured in China" are false, according to fact checkers at AAP, AFP and Snopes. The posts quote Professor Honjo, who won the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine in 2018, as saying that the virus could not be natural, as it spreads in both hot and cold climates. "I have done 40 years of research on animals and viruses. It is not natural. It is manufactured and the virus is completely artificial," the posts allege Professor Honjo said. Fact checkers at AFP were unable to find any record of Professor Honjo making the attributed remarks, and the professor himself issued a statement saying he was "greatly saddened that my name and that of Kyoto University have been used to spread false accusations and misinformation". In Madagascar, the spread of coronavirus misinformation has not been confined to social media: even the country's leader is spruiking an unproven herbal remedy. According to the BBC, President Andry Rajoelina officially launched the herbal tea by claiming it had already cured two people in the country, prompting people to queue for their supply of the free beverage. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "This herbal tea gives results in seven days," Mr Rajoelina said. But the World Health Organisation told the BBC it did not recommend "self-medication with any medicines ... as a prevention or cure for COVID-19". According to a report in the Bangkok Times, authored by AFP, The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention noted: "There is no scientific evidence that any of these alternative remedies can prevent or cure the illness caused by COVID-19. In fact, some of them may not be safe to consume." With advice on when and where to wear a face mask varying widely, efforts to curb confusion are being further hindered by the spread online of misinformation about protective face coverings. One such example can be seen in a Facebook post, shared in a number of languages, purporting to show the effectiveness of face masks when worn by healthy and infected people, or a combination of both. The infographic claims a healthy person wearing a mask has a 70 per cent chance of being infected with the coronavirus by a sick person not wearing a mask. When mask-wearing is reversed, the apparent "contagion probability" falls to 5 per cent. When both healthy and sick people are fitted with masks, the chance of the healthy person of being infected is supposedly just 1 per cent. Fact checkers at Snopes and Reuters found that the information was mostly false, as there was no scientific consensus of the efficacy of face masks nor data to support the quoted percentages. It was also unclear whether the post referred to surgical masks, homemade masks or N95 respirator masks. However, as reported by Snopes, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention say that masks provided a way of "strengthening the social distancing that we are already doing". Fact checkers at Full Fact and factcheck.org have debunked a post shared on Facebook that falsely suggests a vaccine exists for the novel coronavirus. In the post, a caption accompanying the photo of a vaccine vial states: "Now this was 200 tell me why 19 years later they say there is no vaccine." However, the label on the vial clearly states "canine coronavirus vaccine". As is well known by now, coronaviruses are a family of viruses. The current outbreak relates to the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, which causes COVID-19. According to Full Fact, the vaccine shown in the photo is used to protect dogs from the canine coronavirus.  "Canine coronavirus doesnt affect people, and is a gastrointestinal disease, not a respiratory one," Full Fact explained. A video showing brand new medical gowns disintegrating in France has been shared with a misleading caption suggesting the faulty gear was made in China, AFP Fact Check has found. One version of the video, shared on Twitter and retweeted more than 250 times, is captioned: "Protect our doctors & nurses by not buying medical supplies from bloody #China!" But the hospital featured in the video told AFP that the gowns were not made in China. Rather, they were French-made gowns that had been damaged while in storage. "Apparently, the boxes were stored in a humid place, which damaged the overcoats inside," a spokesperson said. US President Donald Trump's recent claim that the US had done more testing for COVID-19 than "every country combined" has been rubished by fact checkers at factcheck.org. When Mr Trump made the claim on April 28, the US had carried out almost 6.03 million tests for the disease, more than any other country but not more than all other countries combined.  According to factcheck.org, more than 25 million tests had been administered outside the US. "So, [Mr] Trumps claim is not even close to being accurate," factcheck.org concluded. Meanwhile, the top US official in charge of testing, Admiral Brett Giroir, said that conducting 5 million COVID-19 tests per day was not feasible with the current technology. "There is absolutely no way on Earth, on this planet or any other planet, that we can do 20 million tests a day, or even five million tests a day," Time magazine reported the testing czar as saying. In its 56-page "roadmap" for a return to normalcy, a Harvard University study had suggested the US would need to conduct at least 5 million tests a day by early June, and 20 million per day by late July, something Giroir claimed was "an Ivory Tower, unreasonable benchmark". Got a fact that needs checking? Tweet us@ABCFactCheckor send us an email atfactcheck@rmit.edu.au 
Coronavirus testing in NSW reaches new record, Gladys Berejiklian warns restrictions to stay for Mother's Day
NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian has warned the state's social-distancing shutdown will not be eased again before Mother's Day. Two of the new cases were at Newmarch House in Western Sydney The national cabinet will meet tomorrow and discuss relaxing restrictions, but Ms Berejiklian said: "I doubt that NSW will be in a position to implement anything before Mother's Day." While the national guidelines for coronavirus social-distancing could be changed tomorrow, Ms Berejiklian said NSW was "very different" to smaller states. "It's important for each state to work within those national guidelines and do what they think is within their state's interests," she said. The Premier said NSW already eased several restrictions this month and needed time to observe the "cumulative" effects of those changes. "We don't want to have a spike in cases that exceeds what we can manage," she said. "The reason we've adopted that approach is to make sure we get back to normal as soon as possible. "I suspect by the end of June, life will feel much more normal than it does now and even during May, life will feel much more normal." The Premier said two adults and their dependent children could visit a household on Mother's Day and several visits could be scheduled across a day. She also pointed to the fact that unlike Queensland and WA, NSW did not have a limit on travel distances and people in Sydney were permitted to make essential visits to regional areas. She said the "greatest gift" for mothers was for children to return to school next week. Health authorities in Australia's worst-affected coronavirus state also confirmed three new infections yesterday. NSW Health revealed a record 10,902 people had been tested for the virus in the 24 hours to 8:00pm. Two of the new infections were staff at Newmarch House in Western Sydney, which could have its licence revoked in light of its climbing death toll. Newmarch House this afternoon confirmed another staff member had tested positive in addition to the two cases announced this morning. Yesterday, Australia's Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission ordered the nursing home's operator, Anglicare, to appoint an external advisor to ensure it was meeting its regulatory obligations. Anglicare today appointed Andrew Kinkade to take on the role for three months. Mr Kinkade has extensive experience in aged care in Australia and the UK and has been contributing to sector-wide preparations and responses to COVID-19. There have been 16 COVID-19 deaths at Newmarch House. 
Queensland tourism operators say trans-Tasman bubble needed 'yesterday' for COVID-19 recovery
Several major Queensland tourism operators say talk of a 'trans-Tasman bubble' has given them a glimmer of hope that they will be able to get up and running and on the road to recovery. New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern attended Australia's national cabinet meeting on Tuesday with Scott Morrison, discussing the possibility of establishing the travel safe zone. While both leaders admitted it was "some time away", Queensland Tourism Industry Council's Daniel Gswind said it marked an important step in the industry's revival. "We want to make sure every step is taken to accelerate the pace of the state reopening," he said. "The tourism industry employs between 230,000 to 240,000 people and we're quite confident that at least 25 to 30 per cent of those jobs have been lost or suspended. "It is very tough for many and we are hanging on by our fingernails in most cases, so to see some revenue come back is absolutely critically important. "We've gone through a few pain thresholds already and I don't think there is much more the tourism operators can sustain. We've actually gone past a point of pain." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Visitors from New Zealand are becoming an increasingly large part of Queensland's tourism market, particularly for regional hotspots like the Sunshine, the Gold Coast, and the Fraser Coast. Last year New Zealand tourists contributed $600 million to the state's economy. Visit Sunshine Coast chief executive, Simon Latchford, said New Zealand visitors last year accounted for almost a quarter of all tourism dollars, and flights to the neighbouring country were set to expand before the pandemic. "New Zealand has always been, and will continue to be, an extraordinarily important market to us," he said. Mr Latchford said travel between Australia and New Zealand could not resume soon enough for struggling operators. "I don't want to speculate on when this will happen but  yesterday would be great, because clearly we need as much leisure and business action going as quickly as we possibly can," he said. Queensland Airports chief executive, Chris Mills, said the idea of international travel recommencing was providing a small amount of hope to struggling tourism industries.  "I think the sentiment was great. [New Zealand] is such a big market for the Gold Coast," he said. "From our perspective as soon as it's safe to open it up we want to see it fast tracked." The Sunshine State's borders have been closed for more than a month with no date set for them to reopen. Mr Gswind said while international and interstate travel was a vital part of Queensland's tourism market, recommencing travel within the state itself was also essential to the industry's recovery.  "We want to see overnight stays as well becoming a possibility," he said. "The Premier hasn't set a date [for when travel within Queensland will be permitted], but she has indicated that a bit more will be possible by the school holidays in June and we will be able to take advantage of what we have on our doorstep." Regional areas are concerned that even if the trans-Tasman bubble goes ahead, and borders reopen, hard-to-reach locations that most visitors would usually fly to will miss out all together with domestic airlines struggling to remain viable. "Our key priority is having flights that come in," Tourism Whitsunday chief executive Tash Wheeler said. "We are a regional area. Getting dispersal out of cities relies heavily on access and flights and we're looking at ways we can partner with trains and buses. "Access is going to be vital to our success." Mr Gswind said there may also be an upside for regional tourism following the pandemic. He anticipated COVID-19 could pave the way for a boost in sustainable tourism in regional Queensland as more people sought wide open spaces to maintain social distancing while travelling. "I think there is this demand for open space," he said. "Back to nature, back to family, and being together with friends  all of those aspects will contribute to a slightly different tourism future. "We are in a good position to meet the changing expectations of consumers post this COVID-19 crisis and I think we do have to turn the crisis into an opportunity." 
Poland delays presidential election after coronavirus, then protests, threw process into disarray
Poland's ruling party leader and a partner in the governing coalition announced an agreement late on Wednesday to postpone Sunday's presidential election, saying a new date will be chosen later. Jaroslaw Kaczynski, head of the ruling Law and Justice party, and Jaroslaw Gowin, leader of a small party in the conservative coalition, called their decision "a solution that will guarantee Poles the opportunity to participate in democratic elections". The May 10 date was set months ago, but the coronavirus pandemic and a government-ordered lockdown threw preparations for Sunday's election into disarray.  Bitter fighting between the conservative governing party and its political opponents kept them from agreeing on an alternative date.   Instead, the ruling party had sought to maintain the election schedule by making it a postal vote. But a disagreement between Kaczynski and Gowin had created a stalemate that had threatened to cause a larger political crisis. Their agreement suggests the crisis has been averted for now. Many in Poland voiced concerns that a postal vote organised on short notice might not be conducted property or even fairly. Nine former Polish prime ministers and presidents urged voters last month to boycott the ballot, claiming it could be unconstitutional. The group included Lech Walesa, who helped overthrow communism as head of the Solidarity trade union movement. Opinion polls at the end of April showed fewer than 30 per cent of Poles were likely to vote. AP/Reuters 
Working from home from parents' cattle station for London events planner Ali Lord
When the coronavirus pandemic began, Ali Lord decided the best place to be was her parents' cattle station in North Queensland. The London-based events planner packed up her laptop and made the 17-day commute  including a 14-day quarantine period  to the other side of the world. She is now working remotely for the foreseeable future. "I left London because my new visa got held up due to coronavirus, which meant that I couldn't work in London until that came through," Ms Lord said. "That time period is looking like two to three months." With more than 32,000 deaths due to COVID-19, the United Kingdom is one of Europe's worst impacted countries. "Being in lockdown in London wasn't too appealing," she said. "You're talking a small two-storey flat and you're allowed outside for 30 minutes a day for your exercise. "Seeing a city like London, to see streets empty, to see the CBD completely bare is something I hope I've never got to see again in my lifetime." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. After spending two weeks in quarantine at a hotel in Sydney, Ms Lord set up her office on Sutherland Station, near Richmond. Her skills have been put to good use on both sides of the world, with the 14 station staff unable to leave and the rodeos and horse races in the area cancelled. "North Queensland has a great reputation for having an incredibly fun social period," she said. "It's really important for our team here that we do have those social moments and it's not just about long days of work." Together with her mother, Kacie, Ms Lord has been running quiz nights and tennis tournaments with the staff, who all live together. "I come up with the ideas and she just puts them into action," Kacie Lord said. "Everybody jumps on board and helps with the cooking or rolling the tennis court." Kacie Lord is also the president of the local Richmond Field Days, a three-day event that has been cancelled due to the pandemic. "It's the biggest event in the Richmond district and it's an iconic event for the whole of the north," she said. "This event's been going for 35 years and nothing has ever stopped it before  no floods, no droughts." Ms Lord was hoping to bring the event back to its former glory next year. "This is my third year doing it and I'm just finding my feet," she said. By that time, Ali Lord is hoping to be back working with her colleagues in London. "I've got a few obstacles to overcome," she said. "But hopefully I'll go back to London for a year or two and then we'll see what happens." 
Coronavirus Care Army raises alarm after 80yo woman falls and breaks hip, trapped in house for days
An 80-year-old woman who fell and broke her hip  stuck alone on the floor of her home for days  has been rescued by police after a member of Queensland's newly-formed coronavirus Care Army raised the alarm. Erika Freingruber feared she was going to die alone in her Beaudesert house, south of Brisbane, and believes she blacked out during parts of the ordeal. Police bodycam footage captured the moment officers kicked down her door after hearing Ms Freingruber calling for help. "I fell down," she told police officers once they were inside. Constable Max Gillet and Constable Glenn Engels offered Ms Freingruber apple juice as she was lying on the floor with a pillow under her head. Ms Freingruber is recovering in hospital after the fall late last month and was visited by her rescuers,who came with flowers in hand. "You're my lifesavers, my angels, not policemen, my angels," she told them.  "Can you imagine a week, nearly a week lying there, without help day and night? "Every doctor who came here said, 'You don't know how lucky you are that you are alive'. "If you wouldn't have come, I don't think I'd be sitting here." MsFreingruber believes she broke her hip when she stepped out of bed in the morning. She cannot remember exactly how long she was there but it was up to five days. "I don't know what happened, I must have fallen unconscious because there's some time I cannot account for." Constable Engels said welfare checks quite often don't end well and he was relieved to hear Ms Freingruber yell out for help. "To hear her call out was gold for us, we knew we were in a good position," he said. He hoped the story of her rescue inspires more people to sign up to be part of the Care Army. "And hopefully save more lives," he said. Concerns about Ms Freingruber were first raised by Care Army worker Paul Mahoney. The new organisation was set up by the State Government to help monitor the elderly and vulnerable during the pandemic. Mr Mahoney said he was worried after not hearing back from her in several days. "I had some concerns because when I spoke to Erika a few days before hand she had really been on the ball," he said. "We'd also had people talk to her  about fall alarms and possibly about her getting one. "She wanted a few days to think over it and when I [returned to work after two days off], I didn't find any notes that had been made about it, so I really was worried," he said. "It rang alarm bells because she'd been so mentally alert that I was worried this was out of the ordinary for her. "I rang her and couldn't contact her and then I also contacted her friend who had not been able to contact her either, so that's when I rang the police." Kate Jones, Minister in charge of the Care Army, thanked volunteers for helping. More than 28,000 volunteers have registered, receiving more than 13,000 calls for help. "When you contrast those images with the images that we've seen of the elderly in places like Italy, Spain and America, it just shows you this is Queensland's story and that Queensland cares," she said. "There would be people in our community that don't have that support and that is what the Care Army is all about." 
Meghan Markle, Duchess of Sussex, reads to son Archie to promote Save the Children UK coronavirus campaign
The Duke and Duchess of Sussex have thrown their celebrity power behind a campaign to bring food and learning resources to children and families struggling during the COVID-19 pandemic. A three-minute video was posted to the Instagram accounts of Save With Stories and Save the Children UK on Wednesday showing former US actor Meghan Markle reading a book to her son Archie Mountbatten-Windsor. The video showed Meghan sitting with Archie, who turned one the same day, on her lap and reading one of his favourite books, Duck! Rabbit!. Archie grabs at the pages and helps turn them during the reading.  Dad Harry, who filmed the short video, whoops and says "bravo" from behind the camera at the end. Save the Children UK has called for a Family Rescue Package to ensure families have the support they need during the coronavirus crisis. The charity wants bigger tax benefits and more relaxed restrictions around jobseeker payments for those with children. Archie's parents chose not to pose with their newborn outside London's Portland Hospital when he was born and decided against giving the baby a royal name. He accompanied his parents on a tour of Africa at the age of four months and was introduced to Archbishop Desmond Tutu, a Nobel Peace Prize winner. Harry and Meghan shocked many early this year with an announcement they intended to quit as senior royals and split their time between Britain and North America. The couple officially stepped down from royal duties at the end of March, saying they were giving up public funding and seeking financial independence. The family went from living in a cottage on the grounds of Windsor Castle, to Vancouver Island in Canada and then on to Los Angeles before lockdown measures commenced. AP 
Maiden voyage for Australian Cattle Enterprises, Australia's newest live-exporter
A new player has emerged in Australia's live-export industry, with Australian Cattle Enterprises (ACE) today loading its maiden voyage out of the Townsville Port. The Darwin-based company might be new, but its founder and managing director Patrick Underwood, is a well-known name in the northern cattle industry and is the former general manager of exporting company, NACC. Speaking to ABC Rural as 4,500 steers and bulls were being prepared for ACE's first consignment to Vietnam, Mr Underwood said it was "a really proud moment". "I've been in the industry for a long time and [starting a company like this] is quite an onerous task, but this is the first shipment for ACE, a new venture, which started as a back-grounding business in northern Australia. "So it's been a big task, but I've had a lot of support from the wider industry and from the Australian government." Mr Underwood said like many businesses, the coronavirus pandemic had caused some "nervous moments" for the new company. "This ship was originally going on April 30, so we delayed it a week at the request of the importer [who was experiencing] slower sales and a two-week lock down in Vietnam. "We understand how important it is to get this right and comply with the regulations in place, both in Australia and overseas," He said finding staff to work on boats during the pandemic had been challenging for the entire live-export trade, but he was happy to have secured a workforce that included respected Australian vet, Dr Ross Ainsworth. "Dr Ainsworth is one of the most experienced vets in the industry and he has undertaken a 14-day self-isolation in Townsville to be allowed on the vessel," he said.  The cattle have all been sourced from Queensland and are being exported to Vietnam's largest importer of Australian livestock, Hoa Phat. The company has two shipments in May and another two planned for June and, according to Mr Underwood, the third shipment due out of Darwin would have buffalo on board as well. "We'll be operating out of northern Australia and we're starting with Vietnam, but we hope to be selling cattle to Indonesia and Malaysia," Mr Underwood said.  
Mount Isa doctor says regional north-west Queensland is waiting for private flu vaccines to arrive
A Mount Isa doctor is reporting supply issues obtaining influenza vaccines this year amidst a rise in demand due to COVID-19, but health authorities are denying a problem. Dr Michael Mbaogu from the Mount Isa Medical Centre said he has seen a "huge increase" in patients presenting for the flu vaccine.  The funded vaccine is available for anyone aged six months to five years, anyone over 65, pregnant women, Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander patients, and people with chronic medical conditions.  "The trouble is that the non-government funding flu vaccines for people nt in the above categories are scarce," Dr Mbaogu said.  Health Minister Steven Miles said this morning that he was aware of "sporadic" shortages in some regional areas.  He said anyone concerned should contact their pharmacist or doctor and ask to be informed when supplies arrive. Mount Isa pharmacist, Vashti Dobson, said she had been told not to expect vaccinations to be delivered before the end of June. "We have tried to order extra vaccines from our supplier, and basically there is a significant delay in receiving those," she said.  "Pre-orders were placed in November and we ordered based on how many people we vaccinated last year, then once there was an increased demand we tried to order additional vaccines in March. "At this stage we're still waiting on 160 vaccines." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Ms Dobson, who is the pharmacist in charge for two local pharmacies, said she does not think the 160 vaccines will fill the demand. "I would say that with the number of calls we're getting, not it won't be enough," she said.  "I think that because of the big media attention around getting a flu shot and the coronavirus situation, that people are concerned that they won't get their vaccination." Australian Medical Association (AMA) North Queensland Representative, Michael Clements, said Queensland Health was doing its best.  "I really can't fault Queensland Health to be honest, remembering that we place our orders for these flu vaccines," Dr Clements said.  "These orders were placed last year, there's only so much that we can do  we could have tempered the health message a little bit, saying 'get your flu vaccine as soon as you can' as opposed to saying 'you need to get it  get it now'." Dr Clements, who works in Karumba every month, said the private flu vaccines were a supply issue not a national shortage. "One of the other things that is effecting demand at the moment is we've seen a lot of companies  making the flu vaccine compulsory," he said. "That's actually adding to the demand for the private flu vaccine stock."  A Queensland Health spokesperson said there had been no issue delivering the government-funded vaccine under the National Immunisation Program to Mount Isa. As of May 6, more than 1.3 million doses of the NIP vaccine have been distributed across Queensland. The spokesperson said all other flu vaccines other than that government-funded program were supplies by private market, not Queensland Health.  "Queensland Health does not have oversight of the supply or availability of influenza vaccine in the private market," the spokesperson said. "However, we are aware that the Australian Government has sourced additional supplies of influenza vaccine, which is anticipated to be available in the private market from June 2020. "There have been no issues with delivering government funded National Immunisation Program influenza vaccine to Mt Isa.  "However, due to limited commercial transportation options, Queensland Health has experienced some difficulty in delivering government funded vaccines to the communities of Burketown and Karumba." 
Why South Australia could lead the nation in economic recovery from coronavirus
South Australia has only recorded one new case of coronavirus in the past fortnight, and the state could be in the box seat to win the race to recovery. There's no denying the global pandemic will have ongoing health implications, especially before a vaccine is developed, but many are predicting the financial implications will last for many years. Just last week, South Australian Treasurer Rob Lucas said he was "horrified" at the inevitable debt the state would accrue over coming years, largely due to spending on coronavirus measures. South Australia is not alone: every state and territory has had increased spending on infrastructure and economic measures to keep people in jobs or subsidise wages for those who have lost work. Some states are expected to suffer more than others, but the news for South Australia has a silver lining. This is largely due to the fact that South Australia doesn't rely as heavily on the industries that are going to be hardest hit. Independent economist Saul Eslake said South Australia's potentially strong position was a "backhanded compliment" for the state  but something it should also attempt to capitalise on. Nationally, Australia saw a gross domestic product rate increase of 2.89 per cent in 2018-19, but South Australia's annual growth rate for the same year was only 1.34 per cent. Usually, having a lower growth rate isn't something to brag about  but, ironically, it could now be the very reason that South Australia might bounce back quicker. "Australia's record-breaking run of economic growth largely owed an awful lot to three things," Mr Eslake said. "Number one, rapid population growth fuelled by immigration. Number two, piggybacking on China's rapid economic growth, industrialisation, and urbanisation. "And three, the housing boom. "One of the reasons why South Australia lagged [behind] the rest of the country over this period was that it derived less benefit from each of these three things." In other words, South Australia's slower economic growth means the state was starting from a lower base, so it didn't have as far to fall. The housing market is likely to be one of the sectors that is hit the hardest, along with tourism. However, South Australia's property market is traditionally more stable than the market in most other states  which could be a significant factor in it bouncing back. "We are in a better position than other states. Our market is less reliant on foreign investment, it's less reliant on investor activity," said Andrew Shields, interim general manager of the Real Estate Institute of SA. "We've also come off two very good quarters of performance in the real estate market so that's definitely positioning us for a good recovery. "Being a conservative market puts us in a much stronger position." While the number of new listings has inevitably declined, the hit has been nowhere near as devastating as initially feared. "We're seeing an average of about 10 per cent drop-off in listing activity, which is far less than what we were predicting," Mr Shields said. While those to the east, and even the west at times, boast of surges in house prices, South Australians usually see much more modest increases. It is for that reason that the SA market may be less vulnerable to the long-term impacts of COVID-19. "Between the election last year and February this year, Sydney and Melbourne in particular saw some quite big price gains," Mr Eslake said. "With worries about negative gearing out of the way and interest rates being cut again, they had a rebound in the property markets." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. But now, those gains are expected to be all but lost, with many homeowners and investors choosing to defer loan repayments as a way of making ends meet.  "When that expires at the end of September, we'll face higher or longer repayments because the banks aren't foregoing the interest, they're just deferring and capitalising it," Mr Eslake said. "And there'll be some people who've done that, who won't have jobs to go back to, and they may be forced to sell or may choose to sell.  "I don't think [South Australia] will have as many households in financial distress." The South Australian tourism industry has been dealt a double blow this year with the summer bushfires impacting two of its most popular destinations  the Adelaide Hills and Kangaroo Island. It will now take the industry even longer to recover, as travel restrictions due to coronavirus are expected to remain in place for months to come. But if there is a positive for South Australian regions it is that the state's share of international tourists has been much lower than its share of domestic tourists. Like the argument that the state's property sector may bounce back quicker, this means the travel industry may recover sooner too. Australian Bureau of Statistics data shows the number of short-term overseas visitors arriving in South Australia in 2018-19 represented only 3 per cent of the national total. It doesn't mean the state had less tourism  in fact, the figures show the percentage of employment and economic activity resulting from the tourism industry in South Australia is on par with the national average. It just means the tourism figures are largely driven by domestic visitors. "Because you're not as dependent on international tourism, the fact that that's going to take a lot longer to recover is less of a drag on South Australia than it will be for most other states," Mr Eslake said. All of this is not to say the coming months and years of recovery will be easy. But the difficult path to recovery may be made slightly less difficult for South Australia, given its hidden strengths. 
Canberra Raiders trio join Bryce Cartwright in refusing flu vaccines, jeopardising NRL restart date
The Canberra Raiders will today seek an exemption from the NRL to allow three players to return to training, despite their refusal to get the flu shot. Raiders forwards Sia Soliola, Joe Tapine and Josh Papalii were told to stay away from training yesterday after they refused to sign an unmodified version of the vaccination waiver. Instead they crossed out the line "that they are at greater risk of getting the flu if they are not vaccinated". It is understood the trio protested the policy on cultural grounds. Players agreeing to get the flu jab is part of the NRL's strict biosecurity protocols that were put in place to allow the competition to restart on May 28. The move by the trio mirrors that of Gold Coast forward Bryce Cartwright, who is also believed to have crossed out the line on the waiver. Prime Minister Scott Morrison yesterday said a "no jab, no play" policy should apply to the NRL. However, Cartwright said in a social media post that he would not be forced into getting a flu jab. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "I won't be bullied into making decisions that could impact my health and the health of my family," he posted on social media. "Giving us the ultimatum of get the shot or be stood down is coercion and leaking private medical information is illegal. "As for me being the first and apparently only one declining the shot is b******t and far from the truth." An NRL spokesperson said players who refused to receive the shot would be dealt with on a case-by-case basis in consultation with club and NRL medical staff. A Rugby League Players' Association (RLPA) spokesman said a player who refused to be vaccinated had the option to sign a waiver so they could continue to train and be available for selection while their case was dealt with by the NRL. The spokesman said the RLPA strongly recommended flu shots but believed players who refused should be dealt with case-by-case and that the vaccination was not mandatory. Cartwright added that he was not an anti-vaxxer. "I stand for the freedom to choose what goes into our bodies  so to label me an 'anti-vaxxer' is spreading misinformation," he said. Cartwright's wife Shanelle posted on social media saying her children were a "picture of health" and that the couple was "not anti anything". Titans winger Dale Copley, who is also the RLPA player director, insisted that whether a player got the flu vaccine or not should be a personal choice. "He [Cartwright] is well and truly able to have the freedom to decide what goes in his body and what doesn't," he said. The Raiders will seek the exemption until the governing body finalises its position. 
Carnival cruises began dealing with coronavirus in January. Here's how the company handled the Ruby Princess in March
As Ros Torrance smiled at the camera on the balcony of her luxury suite aboard the Ruby Princess, she had an inkling something wasn't quite right.  The $600 million cruise ship ticked all the boxes for Ms Torrance and her husband's holiday: a dozen restaurants, casino, bars, pools, mini-golf, a theatre and live entertainment every night.  It was late February and COVID-19 was still weeks away from being declared a pandemic but, as the cruise went on, she started to worry. "Everyone was talking about it. My husband and I were very careful," she said. The couple dined only in the exclusive Club Class dining room. "We didn't go to the buffet to eat," she said.  Ms Torrance was lucky: she was on the ship weeks before the infamous Ruby Princess cruise that has become the single largest source of COVID-19 infections in Australia.  In the final days of her trip, she thought it was unusual to hear announcements asking passengers with a fever to come to the medical centre. "Then they made an announcement that the New South Wales health authorities would not be letting us off when we docked," she said. "They would be coming on board and seeing people that were unwell and that nobody would be disembarking until they were happy," she said. Why New South Wales Health officials boarded that ship to check passengers but allowed thousands of passengers off the next Ruby Princess cruise is just one of the questions now being examined by a Special Commission of Inquiry.  As Ms Torrance waited to disembark on March 8, she noticed the ship was being cleaned. "I was immediately assailed by this incredible smell of disinfectant  we could see the next lot of passengers waiting to get on" she said. Tracey Temple and her mother were standing on the wharf below waiting to board. Their cruise had been delayed for hours and gossip was spreading fast that NSW Health was on board. "I heard that they were fumigating," Ms Temple said.  "I panicked and went and tried to find somebody from the cruise ship." Alarmed, she found a crew member. "I said to her, 'I would like to ask you a question. I am a kidney and pancreas transplant patient. I want to know if it's safe for myself and my mother to get onto this cruise?' "She said that the cruise ship would not let one passenger, let alone all passengers, be put at risk if it wasn't safe to sail," Ms Temple said. Ms Temple and her mother would soon join the hundreds of passengers on other Princess-branded ships who became infected with COVID-19. "I nearly lost my life and my transplant as well, because of somebody's neglect, somebody's stupidity, and the lies, just the lies that they told. "As far as I'm concerned, they put the mighty dollar first and they never put our safety first." Just five weeks before the Ruby Princess embarked on its ill-fated journey, its sister ship the Diamond Princess found itself at the centre of a major deadly outbreak. In late January, the ship sailed from Japan to Hong Kong. A passenger who got off there later tested positive for COVID-19. It took the company nearly two days to tell the 2,666 passengers the news. Melbourne woman Suzanne D'Silva and her family heard the captain announce a previous passenger had tested positive.  They felt assured the situation was under control. "We had no idea what was about to hit us," she said. After the announcement, cruise life continued: packed theatres remained open and guests kept visiting the buffet-style restaurants for meals. Suzanne and her family celebrated a birthday in one of the restaurants that night. The next day, the D'Silva's holiday came to an abrupt halt when the ship docked in Japan. Passengers were told they would be held under quarantine in their rooms for the next 14 days under an order from Japan's Ministry of Health. Japanese Infection Control Specialist Professor Kentaro Iwata boarded the ship to observe the authorities' handling of the outbreak.  He was horrified by what he found. "I don't think there was any strategy. I think the scheme was to contain everybody," Professor Iwata said. "I think the operation at the Diamond Princess was a failure.  "They allowed the spread of the disease inside the cruise ship and they were not being mindful about the fact that many passengers were elderly people who are susceptible to severe diseases." A week after quarantine began, Suzanne D'Silva's daughter was diagnosed with COVID-19. "You're enclosed, you're breathing in this air. The food is coming open. It could be anywhere," she said. "You're hiding from something you don't know and where do you hide?" Three of the four members of the D'Silva family joined more than 700 people on board the Diamond Princess who contracted COVID-19. The company encouraged crew and guests to share images with #princessproud as the quarantine dragged on. Some passengers were confined to windowless cabins, only allowed out once a day to see sunlight. Princess Cruises is part of the world's largest cruise conglomerate, Carnival Corporation, which includes nine brands and over 100 ships in its fleet.  Despite the disaster on board the Diamond Princess, the company was determined to continue sailing. At the end of February, Carnival Corporation's chief medical officer, Dr Grant Tarling, reassured passengers it was safe to cruise. "We've learned a lot from the world's top experts and have stepped up our health protocols even more," he said. "The cruising experience continues to be an exceptional and safe way to travel the world." But less than a week after that message was posted on social media, the company was hit with a second major COVID-19 outbreak. In early March, 21 people aboard the Grand Princess, off the coast of California, tested positive to the virus. The ship was stranded for weeks while authorities scrambled to work out how to manage the outbreak. By March 8, after an hours-long delay, the Ruby Princess set sail from Sydney's Circular Quay on its ill-fated journey. Passengers settled into their holiday, enjoying theatre performances and a Rod Stewart impersonator and dining in the dozen restaurants on board. Ms Temple remembers the mood on board shifting four days into the trip. "We were watching the news and we didn't know until we were on the ship that it had been classed as a pandemic. Then of course, you panic and you think, 'Oh my God, you know, there's no way you can get off'." Princess Cruises announced it would halt all new cruises for the next 60 days. In a video announcement, president Jan Swartz posed the question on everyone's mind. "We've been asked and we've asked ourselves, why COVID-19 seems to be impacting Princess so heavily  We don't really know," she said. Things were about to get worse.  As the Ruby Princess continued on its journey around New Zealand, some on board began to fall ill. Ms Temple and her mother were among them.  It was nothing serious, they thought; just a dry cough and upset stomach. "I wouldn't go to the doctor because they charge you like a wounded bull. I just put it down to a transplant thing, I didn't ever have it cross my mind that it was COVID-19." On March 14, the ship docked in Napier and passengers spread across the town, visiting shops and taking bus tours. Some 24 locals would later test positive for the virus. The Ruby Princess couldn't test for COVID-19 on board but doctors could take viral swabs for processing on shore.  When the ship docked in Wellington the next day, five samples were tested for the virus. All came back negative. In mid-March, the New Zealand and Australian governments announced a ban on all incoming cruise ships. The Ruby Princess headed back to Sydney early. On the way back, the ship's senior physician, Dr Ilse Von Watzdorf, wrote in an email to NSW Health: "It seems we are in the early stages of an influenza A outbreak." But the message being delivered to concerned passengers was very different. "They just kept reassuring you all the time, 'this ship is virus-free'." Ms Temple said.  "The steward that comes and cleans your room. He kept saying 'no, we're clear. This ship is good, we are free. We don't have to worry.'" The Ruby Princess was required to send logs with the number of sick passengers to Federal authorities. The first report showed 53 people were sick and 10 had a temperature. Over the next two days, those numbers more than doubled. NSW Health also wrote to the ship, requesting further information about sick passengers. On the morning of March 18, the ship's doctor reported 104 people had presented to the medical centre with "acute respiratory illness" but only 36 guests, or 0.94 per cent of those on board, had "influenza-like illness". It was this figure, of just less than 1 per cent, that led NSW Health to classify the ship as "low-risk". But the department knew some passengers were in isolation and had been swabbed for COVID 19. What NSW Health didn't know was that the number of sick people on board had continued to climb. The ship's doctor later told the Ruby Princess Inquiry that she was very busy and had forgotten to send through the details of more unwell passengers and crew who had come forward later that day. On the ship's final night at sea, passengers mingled on board, oblivious to the risk posed by the virus. The ship's atrium was filled with passengers for a farewell party. Shortly afterwards, on shore in Sydney, a Carnival Australia Port Agent called 000 to request an ambulance for two passengers on board. She told the operator staff would need to wear protective gear because both had "been tested for coronavirus". That information triggered a late-night decision by the NSW Port Authority to deny the ship pilotage. An hour later, that decision was overturned after the head of the Port Authority spoke to a senior manager at Carnival Australia. He reassured her that the ambulances were not called for COVID-19 reasons and that NSW Health had determined the ship was low-risk. At 2:30am, the Ruby Princess docked in Sydney Harbour and the two ill passengers were rushed to the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital.  A Carnival staffer handed 13 COVID-19 swabs to a pathology courier. Three, including the two taken by ambulance to hospital, would later test positive for the virus. On board the ship on the night of March 18, passengers slept, unaware of the drama unfolding around them. Passengers disembarked early that morning. American Travel Agent Diane Fish led a tour group of 10 people off the cruise.  "It was a long line of crew members with their hands up," she said. "So you're doing this high-five all the way down the ship and I'm thinking, "Oh, my God. I just touched 50 people". When she returned to Miami, Ms Fish tested positive to COVID-19 along with 6 out of her 10-person tour group. "We felt safer on the ship. I mean, we thought we were going to go into the problem. We didn't realise we were going to be the problem," she said. At least 850 passengers and crew have contracted COVID-19 and 24 people are dead. A Special Commission of Inquiry and a police investigation are now trying to get the bottom of who is responsible. Ms Temple blames Princess Cruises for not cancelling the trip.  "Yes, NSW health let us disembark the ship, but Princess Cruises put us on the ship to begin with. They should have cancelled the cruise before us to safeguard us. Because they have a duty of care, or supposedly a duty of care to look after their passengers, and they did not," she said.  Princess Cruises senior vice-president for the Asia-Pacific, Stuart Allison, insisted the company had fulfilled all of its requirements under NSW and federal laws. "Even so, our onboard team had taken no chances, they required guests who reported flu-like symptoms to [remain in] cabins," he said in a video released the week after the ship docked. "The medical team was asked to provide swabs. Our guests could disembark because that was the official government process at the time." Regardless of who is to blame, Ms Temple said she will never be getting on a cruise ship again. "My opinion is that they should put it [Ruby Princess] somewhere out in the middle of the ocean and sink it," she said.  
Coronavirus Australia live news: Some students return to schools as coronavirus restrictions ease
Students return to schools in New South Wales, Queensland, Tasmania and the ACT today, as coronavirus restrictions continue to ease across the country. Follow today's events as they unfold.  By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale By Simon Smale 
Resources industry creating much-needed jobs in regional Queensland despite coronavirus
North Queensland's resources sector is creating much-needed employment as companies press on with expansions during the coronavirus pandemic. Sun Metals in Townsville is months away from reaching peak construction of its $450 million zinc refinery expansion to increase annual production, mostly into Asian markets. Executive director Kathy Danaher said Sun Metals would have created 350 construction jobs by about October, and 100 ongoing positions as construction finishes in the second quarter of 2021. "We're at the pointy end, we're seeing buildings going up [and] connections within piping," Ms Danaher said. Ravenswood Gold has started hiring the dozens of contractors and 150 permanent employees it needs by mid-2021 as it works to extend the mine's life with a large-scale open pit at Ravenswood, south-west of Townsville. "It'll be better for the state, it'll be better for the community  and generally better for the business," CEO Brett Fletcher said. For years, Townsville's unemployment rate has been above the national and state averages but it had been improving before the pandemic hit. Townsville economist Colin Dwyer said the expansions were timely. "We're creating jobs. They're high-income jobs and  they're going to be spending their money, hopefully, in local businesses," Mr Dwyer said. Mr Dwyer said there were dozens of north Queensland construction projects, in a range of industries, that would start soon or had high confidence in proceeding and were just as important in recovering the economy. For example, 270 construction jobs were expected to be created from November when a technology innovation complex was built at James Cook University. "It's that diversification and the essentialness in the projects that are key for recovery," Mr Dwyer said. "If we simply had one specialised area with all of those projects in it, and let's say it's tourism, we would struggle to recover quicker than other regions. That's quicker, not necessarily quickly." Another Townsville economist, Jonathon Pavetto, agreed, and added a call for more investment. "If we really want the economy [to grow], we really need governments to open the chequebook when it comes to infrastructure," he said. It's a similar story in Central Queensland, where a recent study named Emerald among the least economically vulnerable Australian towns to the impact of coronavirus restrictions. BHP has recently put on 125 apprentices in Mackay and Pembroke has received conditional approval to build a new coking-coal mine in the Bowen Basin. ANZ senior commodities strategist Daniel Hynes said Australia's mining sector had held up relatively well but noted project closures and staff lay-offs for some markets. "Companies are obviously  looking at costs  and that's going to result in new projects coming online a little less frequently than we've seen in the past," Mr Hynes said. He said the expansion of the north Queensland gold and zinc projects made sense. "The [gold sector] has been in very strong demand. The zinc side, there is still a little bit of uncertainty around what the post COVID-19 environment will be like," he said. "While these decisions are based on long-term dynamics, even the shorter-term issues should benefit from demand for these products." 
How Australia's 'fake genuine Russian choir' Dustyesky went viral during the coronavirus pandemic
On the breakwater at the surf beach in Brunswick Heads a group of men are reverently singing a rousing Russian revolutionary song. They are dressed as Russian workers, in cloth caps. There is emotional conviction and Russian passion in this song about solidarity. But, infact,none of these comrades have ever been anywhere near the Motherland, seenawindsweptsteppe, or traversed a frozen tundra. Nor do any of them speak Russian (although they do like a vodka). In his impressive fake Russian accent, master of ceremonies for the choir,Mark Swivel, explains: "Dustyeskyis the leading genuine fake Russian choir in southern hemisphere. "We are 28 men, middle-aged, very hairy, and we all live outside the tiny little hamlet of Mullumbimby or, as we call it,Mullumgrad. "And all of us singing like we know the language and the words." Mullumbimby is asmall,subtropicaltown near Byron Bay in northern New South Wales. A freewheeling place of yoga,marijuana, veggies and decidedly alternative ways of being. Not an easy place, then, to summon the suffering in the songs of the battlefields, the despair of the proletarian worker. But Mark says the songs "pick you up, they make you sing them, they sweep youaway". It all began as a bit of a sing and a few beers at the RSL on Tuesday nights. "They had to come up with these elaborate excuses to leave the house," localwriter andcomedian Mandy Nolan tells Australian Story. "They all live in relationships where they have to co-parent and do half the cooking. You don't just go out to the pub with these dudes, you've got to have an excuse. And a Russian choir,thatsit." But then they accidentally went viral, were picked up by Russian television and are now known to millions of Russian people. The ideacame from "comrade" Glenn Wright, a former co-owner and talent booker for Sydney's Harbourside Brasserie, who moved to Byron Shire and started the Mullum Music Festival. "I've had a longstanding love affair with the music of Russia, the great Russian composers and also the marching army songs," he says.  Glenn wanted a Russian choir for the festival but couldn't afford to fly one out, so he hatched the idea of creating one locally. It was 2:00am at a party when they were drinking vodka that Glenn ran into Andrew Swain, an actualchoirmaster. "That was when he asked me. Well, I was pretty much anybody's at that stage," Andrew says. Singing ability was not a high priority when Andrew put the call out.  "I didn't audition anybody, I do believe that everybody can sing," he says. It was about looking the part. "We looked for hairy people, so hairy men, woolly men, men that you could find at the bar late at night." Mark points out that singing ability is subjective. "I have heard some people say thatDustyeskyhas three type of men: one with excellent voice, two, kind of hold a tune, and three, good to have a drink with. We sing perfectfour-partharmony, even though some of us cannot sing." Getting carried away by the music is the point, Andrew says. "When I'm teaching an amazing song to a bunch of people who aren't accomplished singers and we're also drinking beer, usually at the same time, you know, pretty much anything can happen." Although "comrade" Swivel likes to say all the choir members live in shipping containers, work in a typewriter factory, are salmon smokers and make gherkin liqueur, he is in fact a lawyer. "They're from all walks of life," Andrew says of the men. "They're nut farmers, teachers, plumbers, carpenters, musiciansand builders." From their inaugural gig at the Bangalow Hotel in Byron Shire, competing, Mark says, with "greyhounds on television, people playing on the poker machines, and the men in hi-vis vests drinkingTooheysNew", they knew something special was happening. "Everybody dancing and behaving in quite a silly fashion," he says in his trademark faux Russian accent. Perhaps it was the toasts with Russian vodka to make the performance more culturally appropriate, maybe it was Mark announcing that, "now we look forward to meeting yourwomensandlivestocks", aftertheperformance,but suddenly they were in demand at festivals at a time when they only had three songs. Over time the stages got bigger. Theysangat festivals in Melbourne and Sydney, andfor thousands atAdelaide'sWomadelaideFestival. "You could always spot the Russians in the audience because they were the ones crying or singing along to every verse," Andrew says. The Russian ambassador and his entourage came to see them, the ambassador looking, Mark says,like a Bond villain. TheRussianimpostorswere "terrified", Andrew says, when therealRussians started noticing themand their journalists came to interview them. "We were really nervous about whether they would like us or hate us,"he says. Then "out of the blue"theRussia-1TVnetworkpicked up a clip they had made and played it at the end of every news bulletin. It was possibly the only time the word Mullumbimby had been spoken by a Russian broadcaster. "Suddenly my phone started getting messages from Russia in the middle of the night," Andrew says. They were a hit. Bigtimeski. Then came the call from the Russian Ministry of Culture inviting them to sing in Red Square forthe ImmortalRegiment at theGrand Victory Day Parade on May 9. The full Russian display, "250,000 people and [President Vladimir] Putin and the tanks and all the stuff," Andrew says incredulously. The Russian Government were flying 28 men half-way round the world to sing for fourminutes."Most of men not last that long," jokes Mark as his Russian alter ego. "We give it a crack anyway." However, the COVID-19 pandemicstopped the event and Dustyesky's big trip to the Motherland.  Instead, Russian televisionreporters helped the choir to put a clip together. Filmed on theiriPhones in isolation, the group of Aussie men recorded a beautiful yet tragic song about tanks on the battlefield, and a soldier who will not make it home to his family. The Russia Today TV network edited the clip and broadcast it during the Victory Day telecast. The men of Dustyesky were amazed. "Millions of people have watched it and I've been getting hundreds andhundredsofcomments from Russian people saying, 'you guys are amazing, this is incredible'," Andrew says. "It turns out that Russian people are really generous and are quite forgiving about pretty crappy accents." Mark isn't letting COVID-19 restrictions stop the choir singing. "We are choir born for pandemics, most infectious choir on the planet right now," he says. As Dustyesky's popularity surged, a Russian choir sent back a love letter.TheChoir of Udmurtia in the Volga responded with a rendition of Waltzing Matilda.The respect worked both ways. Markhasalso extended aninvitation tothe Kremlin to come share a brew or two and sing a few songs. "We invite President Putin to come toMullumgrad to hang out in the river together. We take off our shirts and cover ourselves in macadamia butter and see what happens," he says. It has taken a motley choir from Mullumbimby to return ancient folk songs and classic songs that were notoftensung anymore to Russian culture. And still have a drink and a laugh. Dustyeskyis proof you can have Russian soul if you really want to. "The songs of Russia are actually the songs of entire world," Mark says. "That is the lesson, if you want one, ofDustyesky. That there is no particular culture, there is just the song, and it holds all of us within it." Watch Dustyesky on Australian Story, 8:00pm (AEST), ABCTV and iview. 
Queensland students return to school today as coronavirus restrictions ease
As more than 600,000 students from years 2 to 10 return to school, Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk says parents can be reassured that no new coronavirus cases have been recorded in Queensland overnight. "I want to thank all the school communities for getting the schools prepared, all the efforts that have gone in, the cleaning and the COVID safe plans and the rapid response plans are in place if there was to be an outbreak," Ms Palaszczuk said this morning. "All of our students are back at school today, and I know there are lots of students happy to back in the classroom, but also lots of happy parents out there." Latest information from Queensland Health. Maddeline Bailey returned to year 1 two weeks ago, leaving her big sister Charlotte to continue being home schooled by their busy parents at their Morningside home in Brisbane's east. The six-year-old was one of 185,000 littlies and senior students who were allowed to return to classrooms in a post-lockdown easing of restrictions. Today it is Charlotte's turn to return to school. Dad Julian Bailey said it had been a "stressful nine weeks", particularly at the start of the lockdown period, with the last two weeks dragging on a little.  "It has been surreal and hats off to teaching staff at all the schools.  "They have had to split themselves in many more ways than we would in a normal workplace," he said.  Mum Sylvia Vos who had been working as an engineer from home said Charlotte was over the moon about putting an end to digital play dates and being able to see her friends face-to-face. "It has been challenging it has been really interesting to work together as a family unit and we often sit down with the girls and say you know we need to work at this together and there was times we would get cranky and impatient," she said.  Both parents are celebrating their freedom and the daytime peace and quiet in the house from today. "I won't have Skype videos with a child just appearing in the corner at the back somewhere because that has been happening quite a lot, and you say, 'oh hello,'" Ms Vos said.  They plan a coffee catch-up out of the house to mark the post COVID-19 lockdown, and maybe a glass of wine tonight.  "We have been self-medicating a little with wine at night, but now life will get back to normal," she laughed.  At Pullenvale State School in Brisbane's west, year 4 student Amelie Goodsir said she was relieved to get back to school after learning at home. "All my brothers and sisters were annoying me," she said. She was most looking forward to seeing her friends and teachers. Zhenya Kireev dropped off both his kids  Stan in year 2 and Elena in prep this morning. "It's good to have them back at school to study properly," he said. "It [home learning] was on and off, it was OK but I think it's better for them to go back." Fellow Pullenvale parent Claire Brodie said she had mixed emotions about dropping off her two children to prep and year 3 classes. "I've been quiet happy to have them home and being homeschooled, but then it's quite nice that they're going into school and seeing all their friends," she said. "And they've been missing their teachers so they're happy to go." For the Malloy family from Runaway Bay it is a huge weight off their shoulders. They've been in lockdown for over eight weeks, teaching two children at home, while also working from home. Mum Kelly worked for a mental health charity while dad Craig ran his marketing business. From piano lessons to maths, they said it was stressful and a challenge to keep juggling all their commitments. But this morning as they send 11-year-old Zara and nine-year-old Lincoln back to formal lessons they have mixed emotions. "It is quite a strange situation, school itself will be a bit different, it is a drop off and go system so no parent contact," Ms Malloy said. "And it's been hard trying to remember what to do, like we couldn't find their school shoes this morning because they have not worn them for so long. "But it will be nice to get back into a routine as the kids have been missing the structure and their friends.  "So hopefully smooth sailing from here."  Parents are concerned their children will struggle with social distancing rules, but Education Minister Grace Grace said they have no need to worry.  "Students don't require to necessarily be physical distancing or social distancing because of the practically of that," she said. "But obviously, we need to maintain our social distance for adults, for teachers, for parents not to gather around outside the school in carparks, for staff to stagger breaks." Ms Grace said schools were stocked up on cleaning supplies and had been thoroughly cleaned in the lead up to students returning.  School activities like sport would be off limit and there would also be staggered lunch breaks.  Queensland Secondary Schools Principals Association President Mark Breckenridge said his 600 members would be feeling a mix of excitement relief but also a degree of trepidation as they welcome students back.  A recent study found Queensland principals were the most stressed, depressed and burnt out in the nation.  The world pandemic adding to the pressure on them to create a "safe new normal" as kids were welcomed back.  "A lot of schools have pivoted a number of times to adjust to different ways of teaching and learning and this is the next step and hopefully the final step," Mr Breckenridge said.  "I think you have just pinch yourself and think has this really been real. "It has been an incredibly strange and trying year for everyone. "It seems like we finished Christmas and the summer break with the bushfires all around and the emotional toll that had on people and all of a sudden this virus arrives." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Dean of Education at Griffith University Professor Donna Pendergast said it was not surprising some students were anxious going back as "schooling is now so different from when everyone left". "We need to check children feel well supported at school and that their friendship groups have been re-established," she said. She was also urging children to not to think about their grades just yet, because their social and emotional well-being was more important at this stage. Term two will run until late June.  
Eight big issues for vulnerable students highlighted by coronavirus crisis, charity says
She's only six years old, but Sylvana's education has already served up challenges most kids won't even need to think about during their entire school life. When the COVID-19 crisis closed her school, Sylvana was forced to switch to online learning in a home that didn't even have a computer. "We just had Nanny's mobile phone," Sylvana said. For the first three weeks, Sylvana and her grandmother Sylvia  her primary carer  both struggled. "We [were] learning through the mobile phone, which was very difficult at times because you couldn't even read it," Sylvia said. "I'm 63, Sylvana's nearly seven. And I'm thinking, it's been that many years since I've been to school, how am I going to help her?" Sylvia had never asked for help before, but she steeled herself and approached the Smith Family. The charity supplied a laptop and internet connection. "I felt so happy," Sylvana said, before adding with a laugh: "But Nanny opened the box so I was a little bit angry." Even with the laptop it's been a struggle, and Sylvia knows Sylvana has fallen behind. "I think there's going to be a lot of work catching up, because I can only do so much," Sylvia said. The Smith Family, Australia's leading educational charity, has produced a report based on its work helping 700 schools and 50,000 disadvantaged students during the COVID-19 crisis. It's the broadest look yet at the impact of Australia's biggest education experiment in decades  remote learning  and the implications for the futures of many young people. The report identifies eight key areas of concern:  The "digital divide" faced by families without computers or internet, or multiple children sharing one device  Challenges with homeschooling such as the stress of establishing new routines and financial pressures from the cost of stationery, printing, etc  Increased risk of students disengaging altogether  particularly those starting high school this year, or in year 10  Unemployment as many tertiary students lose their jobs  Mental health concerns  Limitations on family life and loss of family supports creating issues with interactions with extended family  Food insecurity and the closure of school breakfast clubs, with one family's weekly food budget increasing from $200 to $350  Delays and difficulty accessing support services A separate report released today by the Centre for Independent Studies (CIS) warns disadvantaged students in NSW, Queensland, Victoria, Tasmania and the ACT will have fallen several weeks behind. Using US data on normal schools compared to online schools, and applying the findings to NAPLAN results in Australia, the think tank estimates those students will have to catch up one to two weeks' lost learning in reading and two to three weeks' in numeracy. "The learning lost due to Australian school closures is not irretrievable, but it does require state and territory governments to assess students on return to school, identify those who have fallen behind, and provide intensive intervention to ensure they catch up with their peers," the CIS report says. Source: Pain without gain: Why school closures are bad policy, Centre for Independent Studies Jasmyn Lloyd is seen as a future Indigenous leader, but the 20-year-old medical student from rural SA is finding it tough just getting by at the moment. She too was supported by the charity in school, and surprised herself by getting the marks she needed to study medicine. She dreams of returning to a small community as a rural GP after she finishes university, but COVID-19 has threatened her hard work. A Smith Family scholarship meant she could buy a laptop to keep up with remote learning, but the pandemic led to the loss of her part-time job and her parents can't assist her financially. "It was a lot of shock horror," she said. "There was a lot of times where I'm like, 'I'm going to have to move back home, I'm going to have to quit uni, I can't afford to stay in the city anymore', and it was getting to the stage where I was almost having to pack my bags." Again, the Smith Family's insights suggest Ms Lloyd's experience is all too common, with tertiary students from disadvantaged backgrounds facing similar challenges to schoolkids. Many have had to deal with changed living arrangements, especially those who had been staying on campus or in student accommodation. Some also did not have access to internet, computers or affordable data, and were reliant on financial help. In addition to appealing for donations to its winter relief program the charity is calling on governments, corporations and the community to help these students. The report says "tackling digital disadvantage" should be a top priority in the pandemic recovery. When coronavirus suddenly tilted the educational playing field, Ryan Hicklin  stuck with just a pre-paid mobile phone  did not have the tools he needed to learn. Then a charity stepped in to help. It calls on telecommunications companies to find ways to offer further help to low-income families, following NBN Co's $150 million COVID-19 relief package. "This could involve discounting retail prices, or the direct provision of data and home internet packages to target groups," the report says. It also calls for technical support helplines for parents and carers who need help with digital proficiency and students' online learning platforms. Smith Family CEO Lisa O'Brien said vulnerable students returning to school might need additional learning support to make up for lost time. "It's important we act now so these students don't fall even further behind," she said. The ABC understands states are working on testing programs to identify students who have fallen behind. 
Coronavirus restrictions mean big changes to how people grieve and mourn across a range of communities
Lisa Gossling slept by her mother Pat's side in her final days at the nursing home and was there as the 82-year-old drew her last breath. "I said, 'You can do this, it's okay' and she peacefully went in the middle of one of her favourite songs," she said. Within days of Pat's passing, the COVID-19 response went from a few measures to funerals limited to just 10 people. For Lisa, saying goodbye instantly became more complicated. "My brother's got six kids, my sister's got two, we've got three  how do you choose what eight people go to that funeral?" Surfers Paradise Catholic Priest Peter Dillon and his colleague have conducted more than 20 funerals since the March restrictions were put in place. He witnessed first-hand how coronavirus was changing the grieving process. "The family and the loved ones also have the added issue of having to decide who can be there, how they select the closest friends and relatives," he said. For journalist Osman Faruqi, the death of a friend last week came as a shock. Sam, a talented writer and close friend, was just 23 years old. "They were the young person in the prime of their lives who brought so much joy and love to people around them," he said. "Hearing that they had gone has led to this intense flood of emotions that don't quite make sense." Faruqi told The Drum that grieving had been harder than he could have predicted. "To try and make sense of [your emotions], you want to be around people who understand what you are feeling," he said. Travel restrictions have meant it was more difficult for Osman to get back to Sydney, where Sam lived. "I certainly never expected myself to be in a situation where someone very close to me passed away and the first thought I had was, 'Will I be able to attend the funeral? How will I get there and physically be in a space where I can grieve with people?'" Senior Rabbi Yaakov Glasman from the St Kilda Hebrew Congregation said COVID-19 created a "vacuum" of human connection in recent weeks. "My sense is that mourners are more vulnerable then they were before." It is not unusual for hundreds of people to normally attend an Orthodox Jewish Funeral. "[Now] you feel like you are walking into this empty space, it just doesn't have the same kind of spirit," he said. Rabbi Glasman told The Drum that live streaming funeral services were always available but now it is a requirement, rather than an addition. This includes hosting the seven-day mourning period  the shiva gathering  via Zoom. "My sense has been that families that have taken up [that] opportunity have been deeply grateful for it." "When they felt most alone and they felt most vulnerable it was the ability to be able to connect  albeit via Zoom or via technology  that gave them a sense of comfort and a sense of feeling supported during their difficult times." "A good funeral enables people to grieve well, to go through the process of separation from the people they loved," Reverend Dr Colleen O'Reilly told The Drum. Rev O'Reilly said the ritual of a funeral is a fundamental part of making sense of the "chaotic" world people can find themselves in after a loved one has died. Like Rabbi Yaakov Glasman, both the Lebanese Muslim Association and Surfer's Paradise Catholic Parish made the necessary changes to keep the funeral process as "normal" as it could be, in COVID times. Father Peter Dillon was "pleasantly surprised" by his community's response  particularly to the restrictions on the number of people who could be physically present at the event. "Not having to speak to large crowds of people allows us to be a lot more personal, a lot more connected with what is taking place." He's now considering continuing to offer streaming as part of his services post-COVID-19. The Lebanese Muslim Association told The Drum their funeral proceedings would normally involve hundreds, sometimes thousands of people. "The [distancing] rules have been something the community really had to grapple with," he said. The group has chosen not to stream services, out of respect for the deceased. But Ahmad Malas said they were able to find ways to maintain the very communal way of saying goodbye. "People have been providing that continuous support to the family over the phone or through social media like Facebook, WhatsApp." Father Dillon said plans to regroup after restrictions are eased might be too much for some. "People may not necessarily have the inner strength to be able to replicate this again down the track." But for others, it's an opportunity. Pat's body has been cremated and Lisa plans to have a memorial with family and friends when the COVID-19 threat has passed. "I think it's given us a breather to find out what we really want. "I think with time to process it, we'll be like, 'this is the right way forward'." 
Coronavirus update: Japan set to unveil second stimulus package worth more than 100 trillion yen
The Japanese Government is reportedly putting the final touches on a relief package worth more than $1 trillion as the country's economy prepares for its worst slump since World War II. Meanwhile, Europeans and Americans took advantage of the first holiday weekend since coronavirus restrictions were eased, while British Prime Minister Boris Johnson voiced his support for Dominic Cummings, his senior adviser who travelled across England during the lockdown. This story will be regularly updated throughout Monday. Japan is finalising a coronavirus relief package worth more than 100 trillion yen ($1.4 trillion), following last month's 117-trillion-yen stimulus, according to reports in the Nikkei newspaper. The package, to be funded by a second extra budget for the current fiscal year beginning in April, would be the latest effort by Tokyo to support an economy on track for its deepest slump since World War II, as the pandemic crushes businesses and consumer spending. Japan ended state of emergency measures for most regions and plans to hold a panel discussion on Monday to decide whether to lift them in remaining places, including Tokyo. "Japan's economy is in an extremely severe state and we need to pull out of this situation as soon as we can," Finance Minister Taro Aso said last week. The Government is expected to approve the budget after Japan's economy slipped into recession in the last quarter, with analysts expecting another 22 per cent contraction in April-June due to the hit from the health crisis. The deepening pain from the pandemic is forcing the Government to add to Japan's huge debt pile, which is already twice the size of its economy, to pay for big spending plans. According to a study by Columbia University economics professor Ceyhun Elgin, Japan has some of the most aggressive relief spending of any country, with its last package worth more than 20 per cent of the country's GDP. That compares to around 14 per cent in the US and 11 per cent in Australia spent on bailouts and stimulus. The Birdsville races, known as the Melbourne Cup of the outback, will not go ahead this year due to coronavirus concerns. Famous for its dusty track in the Simpson Desert, the two-day event draws thousands of people to the small town in Queensland's Diamantina Shire, which normally has a population of just 115 people. The races were set to be held on September 4 and 5, but have been cancelled in a devastating blow for the town's economy. "As much as we were holding onto the hope that we could run them, we're at a point where we've had to concede defeat. The health of our patrons, and those who live in Outback Queensland, is of paramount importance to us and it is impossible to know what the status with COVID-19 will be come September," Birdsville Race Club president Gary Brook said. "We have been following the Queensland Government's roadmap for easing of restrictions, and with the easing of restrictions on mass gatherings not currently part of the roadmap, it is too much of a stretch to expect that by September we could safely host thousands of people in Birdsville." Birdsville has hosted the races since 1882 but it was last cancelled as recently as 2007, due to equine influenza. The 2021 edition of the races has been pencilled in for September 3 and 4, when organisers are hoping for a record crowd thanks to a possible boom in domestic tourism. The Government does not plan to expand the criteria or the timeframe for JobKeeeper and JobSeeker payments introduced during the pandemic, according to the Treasurer. Despite the Government having to spend $60 billion less than expected on JobKeeper payments due to errors made by businesses filling out applications, Josh Frydenberg told News Breakfast there were no plans for "wholesale changes". Mr Frydenberg emphasised both the new JobKeeper program and the boosted JobSeeker payment (formerly Newstart) are "temporary, targeted and proportionate to the challenge we face". He did, however, flag that the tourism sector could be in need of more assistance, with international borders set to remain closed even as the rest of the country opens up, which would be a topic of conversation at a scheduled review of JobKeeper next month. "The tourism sector could be one sector in need of further support. That's what we'll look at in the context of the economic situation at the time. You'll continue to see our international borders closed for some time," he said. "It's estimated some 850,000 people will be back in work as a result of those three stages of restrictions being lifted. That's the way to get people back into a job."  Europeans soaked up plenty of sun where they could over the weekend, as governments grappled with how and when to safely let in foreign travellers to salvage the vital summer tourist season. Across Europe, a mishmash of travel restrictions appears to be on the horizon, often depending on where travellers live and what passports they carry.  Germany, France and other countries aim to open their borders for European travel in mid-June, but it isn't clear when intercontinental travel will resume. Spain, one of the worst-hit countries in the pandemic and also one of the world's top destinations for international travellers, says it won't reopen for foreign tourists until July. In Germany, domestic tourists will be allowed to return to Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania in the north-east  home to the country's Baltic Sea coast  and to hotels in Berlin this week. The La Grande-Motte resort beach in France came up with a way to control its usual weekend crowds by introducing a booking system. Beachgoers must pre-book an 8-square-metre patch of sand online, and that area will will be roped off to keep them a safe distance from others. Reservations are free but required, and there is already a two-day waiting list. In Paris, where all city parks remain closed, locals soaked up the sun along the embankments of the Seine River and lounged on ledges outside the Tuileries Gardens.  From Thursday, the White House will start denying admission to foreigners who have been in Brazil during the two-week period before they hoped to enter the US, broadening its travel ban against countries hit hardest by coronavirus. President Donald Trump had already banned travel from the United Kingdom, Europe and China, and flagged last week that he was considering similar restrictions for Brazil. The US leads the world in the number of confirmed cases, with more than 1.6 million, followed by Brazil (363,000) and Russia (344,000). An adviser to Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro said the restrictions followed previously established benchmarks, playing down the move from Mr Trump, whose support Mr Bolsonaro has touted. "There is nothing specific against Brazil. We hope that'll be temporary," tweeted Filipe Martins, an advisor on international affairs to the Brazilian President. Press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said Mr Trump's latest move was designed to "protect our country", which is expected to pass 100,000 coronavirus deaths in coming days. As with the other bans, it does not apply to legal permanent residents or spouses, parents or children of US citizens or legal permanent residents. Brazil has recorded more than 22,000 deaths  the fifth highest tally in the world. The Memorial Day weekend, which marks the unofficial start of summer in the US, meant big crowds at beaches and warnings from authorities about people disregarding the coronavirus social-distancing rules. Americans traditionally spend the weekend travelling to beaches, gathering at backyard barbecues and unfurling picnic blankets in parks. Among those soaking in the sun and enjoying a bit of travel on Saturday was President Donald Trump, who was seen golfing at his Trump National Golf Club in northern Virginia, his first golf outing since the White House declared a national emergency over the coronavirus outbreak in March. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson has backed senior adviser Dominic Cummings, despite calls from within his own Conservative Party for the aide to resign for travelling more than 400 kilometres during the coronavirus lockdown.  "I conclude that in travelling to find the right kind of childcare, at the moment when both he and his wife were about to be incapacitated by coronavirus, and when he had no alternative  I think he followed the instincts of every father, and every parent. And I do not mark him down for that.," Mr Johnson said. "I believe that in every respect he has acted responsibly and legally." Mr Cummings, who masterminded the 2016 Brexit campaign, came under pressure after it emerged that he had travelled from London to Durham in late March while showing symptoms of COVID-19, when Britain was under a strict lockdown to combat the outbreak. Since players returned to limited group training earlier this week, eight positive tests for the virus have been confirmed at England's top football clubs. Six individuals, including Watford defender Adrian Mariappa and Burnley assistant manager Ian Woan, were positive in the first round of testing on May 17-18. A Bournemouth player was one of two people working for Premier League clubs who tested positive following a second batch of testing No matches have been played in the Premier League since March, but the UK Government has given the go-ahead for elite sport to resume from June 1. The Premier League's Project Restart envisages a return to competitive action in June, although no date has been fixed. Similarly, the Spanish La Liga competition has been given the green light by Spanish authorities to return to action from June 8. All organised soccer in Spain was provisionally suspended on March 12, although clubs in the top two divisions have since returned to group training. La Liga has yet to officially confirm a date on which it will resume, although its president Javier Tebas had said previously he hoped the season could restart on June 12. ABC/wires 
Yemen's health system 'has in effect collapsed' as coronavirus spreads 'largely undetected', UN says
Hundreds of deaths from "coronavirus-like symptoms" have raised fears COVID-19 is rapidly spreading undetected throughout war-torn Yemen, where the United Nations and medical workers say the health care system "has in effect collapsed". According to official numbers, Yemen have confirmed 212 infections and 39 deaths, but with one of lowest rates of testing in the world, aid workers fear this figure is "just the tip of the iceberg". Medicins Sans Frontieres (MSF) reported on Friday as many as 80 people were dying at home per day  up from a pre-outbreak norm of 10  in the city of Aden, where the international aid group run the only dedicated COVID-19 centre in southern Yemen. "What we are seeing in our treatment centre is just the tip of the iceberg in terms of the number of people infected and dying in the city," said Caroline Seguin, MSF's operations manager for Yemen. "People are coming to us too late to save, and we know that many more people are not coming at all. They are just dying at home." Earlier this month, Save the Children reported at least 385 deaths within one week from "coronavirus-like symptoms" in Aden. War-ravaged Yemen, whose malnourished population has among the world's lowest immunity levels to disease, is divided between the Saudi-backed Government based in Aden and its foe, the Iran-aligned Houthi group, in the north. This week Jens Laerke, spokesman for the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, told a Geneva briefing that after five years of war and now a pandemic, "Yemen is really on the brink" and its health system "has in effect collapsed". The UN estimates that it will seek $US2 billion ($3 billion) for Yemen to maintain aid programs through to the end of the year, Mr Laerke said. "If we do not get the money coming in, the programs that are keeping people alive, are very much essential to fighting back against COVID, will have to close," he said. "And then the world will have to witness . . . what happens without a functioning health system battling COVID. I do not think the world wants to see that." Aid agencies say Yemen desperately needs medical equipment, protective gear for health workers and widespread testing to combat the virus. In a report, the International Rescue Committee (IRC) listed coronavirus testing rates in Yemen among the lowest in the world  31 tests per million, compared to 45,910 tests per million in Australia and 38,394 tests per million in the United States. As coronavirus spreads around the globe, health experts and aid groups fear some of the world's most vulnerable countries in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and the Pacific could become new hotspots for COVID-19. "[The] significant shortfall in COVID-19 testing in many conflict-affected countries highlights the dangerous prospect of undetected and therefore uncontrolled outbreaks as the coronavirus continues to spread globally," the report said. The IRC's president and chief executive David Miliband said a "global response" was crucial to "beat the pandemic". "We are in a race against time  This pandemic will not come to an end here until it is under control everywhere," he said. "COVID-19 has already brought the strongest health systems in the world to their knees," Mr Miliband said, adding that war had caused a "shocking disparity of health system capacity" in Yemen. "The lack of testing is a major barrier to even seeing the tip of this global iceberg, let alone its full and devastating scale." Medical workers in southern Yemen told the ABC that some staff had been detained or threatened by authorities for sharing information about the outbreak on social media. "There is no testing capacity and your authorities in the north are hiding the potency indicators," said one medical professional who asked not to be identified for fear of reprisals. "The situation is a disaster, it's devastating." The cap on information has left the public largely unaware of the dangers or reliant on false information about the pandemic. In Aden, health workers said many patients were not coming forward with symptoms due to fears of being locked in the city's isolation centre. One gravedigger said he had never seen such a constant flow of dead  even in a city that has seen multiple bouts of bloody street battles during the civil war. Drone footage seen by the ABC showed mass burials taking place on the outskirts of the city. The Yemeni Government has not enforced widespread lockdown measures, curfews or social distancing to curb the pandemic. "There are no measures taken in the north and very little in the south," a medical professional told the ABC, speaking on condition of anonymity. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. He said large gatherings were still widespread according to local traditions during the Islamic month of Ramadan, while access to patients in many areas was also being hindered by the ongoing conflict. "We have very strong reason to be afraid of the devastating impact of COVID-19 in Yemen," he said. "We are almost losing control all the time  It can be very, very bad for the country and for the population." Meanwhile, at least five hospitals closed in Aden over the past week, as there was no money to pay staff and no protective equipment for workers, he said. Before the outbreak, the country's medical system was already on the verge of collapse after five years of war and widespread famine. There are also fears seasonal outbreaks of cholera, diphtheria and dengue, which occur frequently throughout the country, could further devastate medical resources. 
Tough times for meat processors battling trade restrictions and record livestock prices
Record livestock prices are forcing some abattoirs in New South Wales to cancel shifts or shut down operations in the short term. JBS shut down its plant in Scone last Friday due to a shortage of livestock while Southern Meats in Goulburn has shut down its plant this week. The Eastern Young Cattle Indicator (EYCI) hit a record high this week as rainfall around New South Wales and Queensland encouraged producers to hang on to their livestock.  The price of young cattle has doubled in the first two months of 2020 and while a record number of cows and heifers were processed last year slaughter rates are now slowing down significantly. That is creating big problems for the red meat industry and the peak body is now calling for cuts to government charges to help keep the abattoirs running. Trade lamb prices have also surged 25 per cent this year and are now threatening the $10/kg barrier. The sharp rise forced Southern Meats Group to shut down its abattoir in Goulburn this week. CEO Coll MacRury said it was a short-term strategy to help manage costs and avoid them running at a loss. "The prices are just crazy at the moment and  we will continue to be in out and of the market while it remains at this level," he said. Southern Meats will be operating with limited kills next week but the outlook is likely to get even harder for sheep processors.  Rural Bank is forecasting a 45 per cent drop in the slaughter rate heading into winter as producers hang on to their livestock to re-build the flock after the long drought. Mr MacRury confirmed the company's other in Western Australia WAMMCO would continue to operate at this stage. With some abattoirs cutting back shifts or closing abattoirs short term, it is possible that casuals in the industry may lose their jobs.  Patrick Hutchinson, the CEO of the Australian Meat Industry Council, said that would be a big hit to regional economies as the sector employs 40,000 people directly. "They may go to shutting down completely, they may go to three days a week, or two shifts to one shift, there's a number of levers they can pull." He said processors will be cautious about longer shut downs as it can take a long time to get back up to speed again.  Patrick Hutchinson is calling for relief from Federal Government charges as well as cuts to State Government payroll taxes. "We pay about a $100m in export certification fees and on a state base level, what about payroll tax exemption over a two-year period?" "That could save a medium-sized abattoir $1m a year," he said. Mr Hutchinson warned of the consequences for the broader economy if meat processors, Australia's biggest agricultural industry, experienced a downturn. "If it sneezes will the rest of agriculture catch a cold?" ABC News Online readers share how coronavirus is already affecting their work, what impacts it might have and how businesses are preparing for the worst. High prices and short supply of livestock were not the only problems facing the abattoirs. The outbreak of coronavirus has led to a downturn in the chilled export beef market, according to one business operator in southern NSW. Monbeef in Cooma supplies boxed beef throughout Australia and to 26 other countries. Plant manager John Hill said demand had dropped off due to movement restrictions in China and refrigerated and freezer containers were also stuck there. "The export job at the moment has had a downturn because of the coronavirus." "We now have to pre-book shipping containers three and four weeks in advance," he said. "It means we have to plan for the quantities of product down to the last box, or we lose our spot on the vessels." Prices have also softened, he said, but the reduced demand from China may only be temporary. Analysts from Rural Bank estimate that the shortage in protein in China caused by the massive cull of pigs due to the outbreak of African swine fever will probably result in that country importing large volumes of beef instead. While the coronavirus is affecting exports and record prices in Australia is making it tough to source livestock, John Hill said Monbeef in Cooma would stay open. "We're still in full production and hope to be in full production for quite a while." "I think the one thing in our advantage is we are a small plant and we firmly believe we'll be able to source enough cattle to keep up production." "The big priority, is keeping cattle in front of my staff, so we are in production as many days as possible." 
Victoria to ease coronavirus restrictions to allow gatherings of up to 20 people in homes
Victorians will be allowed to have up to 20 people in their homes and stay overnight at private residences and tourist accommodation from June 1, under an easing of coronavirus restrictions. Camping will also be allowed at state and national parks, but communal facilities like kitchens and bathrooms will remain closed. Victorians will be able to celebrate weddings with up to 20 people in addition to the celebrant and couple, and up to 50 people at funerals. Up to 20 people will be allowed at other religious ceremonies, in addition to those required to perform the service. "It's not so much about 'stay home', but it is absolutely about 'stay safe'," Premier Daniel Andrews said. In an early concession ahead of the June changes, Victorians will be able to use outdoor playgrounds, skateparks and outdoor gym equipment from Tuesday  the same day some children return to state schools. But those who can work from home will be urged to continue to do so, to prevent the amount of contact that occurs when colleagues share bathrooms, kitchens and office spaces. Mr Andrews said that, along with the cumulative impact of the "cautious easing" of restrictions, would be reassessed in June. "I know it's inconvenient  but if you have been working from home you must keep working from home throughout June," Mr Andrews said. The Premier announced the changes as it was revealed two new cases of COVID-19 were recorded in Victoria overnight. The state's total rose to 1,603, a net increase of one after an earlier case was recorded as a duplicate. Updated Sunday, May 24 The 20-person limit in homes will include members of that household. Mr Andrews said the resumption of overnight stays would be "critically important" to the tourism and hospitality industry, which had been hit hard by the shutdown. "Hotels, motels, other important accommodation venues  particularly in regional Victoria where we know tourism is such an important part, and particularly bushfire-affected communities  that sector will be able to reopen from June 1," he said. Accommodation venues will have to have strict rules in shared spaces. Public libraries, some entertainment and cultural venues and zoos will also be reopened to smaller crowds. Up to 20 people will again be able to swim at pools, while community sport will be allowed to resume with the 20-person cap in undivided spaces, provided physical-distancing measures are observed. Beauty services like nail salons, spas and tattoo parlours will be able to reopen with up to 20 customers per space. They will be required to keep customers' contact details. Mr Andrews last week announced cafes, restaurants and pubs will be open to 20 patrons from June 1, provided physical-distancing guidelines were met. A timeline for the reopening of clubs is not yet known, with Mr Andrews saying it will be difficult to manage physical-distancing rules without seating and with the presence of alcohol. "[Clubs] would have to look very, very different, and it will be a matter of us engaging with that sector to see whether they want to open up under those rules," he said. The Andrews Government has faced criticism for the speed at which restrictions have been eased. Other states allowed broader changes earlier this month. The Premier again linked the gradual lifting of restrictions to the state's aim to prevent the pandemic from getting out of control as it had in countries overseas. "There are examples in other countries where they opened too much, too quickly, and now they've had to reintroduce even tougher rules, even harder lockdowns," he said. "We're doing this in a careful and cautious way, that's the only way to do it." Mr Andrews said the state would look to further relax restrictions from June 22 if transmission rates remained low and testing rates remained high. From that date, indoor fitness and recreation facilities are scheduled to open with up to 20 people per space and up to 10 people per group or activity at any one time. Restaurants, cafes, galleries and museums will then be allowed to host up to 50 people and, for the first time, cinemas and theatres will reopen. "And for those eager to hit the slopes, the ski season will open slightly later this year on June 22," Mr Andrews said. The Premier said all the sectors affected by the announced easing of restrictions would be comprehensively consulted in coming weeks about the precautions needed as life returned to some sense of normality. "If we just have everybody returning to business as usual in those indoor workplaces then we will just see this virus spread and all of our good work will be frittered away," he said. Throughout the announcement, Mr Andrews stressed widespread testing of every Victorian with even the slightest coronavirus symptoms was "critical" to enabling the easing of restrictions. "That's what gives us options," he said. "The more people that get tested, the more options we have to not make changes based on guesswork, but instead to make changes based on what the data is telling us. "With so few community transmissions and so much testing, we are now able to further ease restrictions in many different sectors." Health Minister Jenny Mikakos said the state had undertaken more than 420,000 tests since they began at the start of the year. A target of 150,000 new tests to be completed in the window between the last easing of restrictions on May 13 and the end of the month has already been exceeded, with 174,000 tests one week ahead of schedule. "As we ease, we have to continue testing at record high levels," Mr Andrews said. "If you wait until people start presenting into emergency departments, it is too late." 
Queensland Government offers vouchers to get kids back into community sport after coronavirus
Parents whose incomes have been slashed because of the coronavirus pandemic are set to receive financial help from the Queensland Government to get their children back into community sport. Vouchers of $150 will be available for families who can prove the pandemic financial hit, as sporting clubs prepare to return to training and play from June 13 onwards. Sport Minister Mick Di Brenni said many families would struggle to re-enrol their kids into much-loved weekend activities. "This is about making sure that 73,000 households in Queensland that are doing it tough are going to be able to afford to play sport," he said. "Kids have been through a lot in 2020. This has been a really tough time for them. "And giving them the opportunity to get back out on the sporting field, with their friends, is extremely important." The Government will also repurpose more than $50 million of sports funding to get clubs ready to operate under new COVID-19 restrictions. From June 13, sports teams with up to 20 people will be allowed to resume, in line with strict coronavirus restrictions, including non-contact provisions. Full contact sport, and all other activities with larger groups, can resume a month later. All clubs will need to develop COVID-safe plans, which will include the sterilisation of equipment, the use of sanitisation stations, the reduction of spectators, and social distancing on the sidelines through the use of physical barriers in high-population areas. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said the $50m would be given as grants to help clubs get ready for the "new normal". "That includes $2,000 funding grants for up to 7,000 clubs state-wide to buy their cleaning equipment and other essentials," she said. "So, as we carefully start to resume training, sanitising balls, racquets and facilities before and after use is an absolute must to keep everyone and our communities safe." "It gives them time to get their COVID-safe plans in place and so that parents are aware and children as well." Federal guidelines have recommended limits on the number of parents, guardians and onlookers at games, which Ms Palaszczuk has backed. "It is going to be tough but we have to do it," she said. "What we don't want to see is large groups of parents congregating, as does happen on the side of sporting fields. "We really just have to listen to the health advice." 
Wedding celebrants suffer as couples put marriage on hold during coronavirus pandemic
The coronavirus pandemic has served up a double dose of disappointment for one marriage celebrant from Ballarat in central Victoria. Kate Ritchie, who has presided over ceremonies for 12 years, has not only taken an economic hit from cancelled and postponed ceremonies, but her own wedding to her fiance David, slated for April 9, had to be put on the backburner too. "We had decided it was probably not in the best interest of some of our family members to [carry on with the ceremony]," she said. "I didn't want my wedding to be remembered because Gran got sick or Grandpa got sick. "We had our little cry and then we put on our big girl undies and kept marching on." The couple now hope to exchange their vows early next year. "It's going to be a challenge to fit into that dress," Ms Ritchie said. "It fit me then but I don't think it will fit me after winter. "We're lucky  not many people get to look forward to their wedding twice. "We had months of looking forward to the wedding that was originally organised and now we get that excitement all over again." While the restrictions have forced some of Ms Ritchie's clients to change their wedding plans, she has been grateful the timing of the lockdown only affected the tail end of Ballarat's wedding season. The weddings that Ms Ritchie has officiated during the coronavirus pandemic have been restricted to five people, which included the bride, groom and celebrant.  In Victoria, guest numbers have now been lifted to 10, plus the couple. Bindi Irwin ties the knot at Australia Zoo, just before the Federal Government's restrictions on the number of wedding guests that came into force at midnight. "A lot of extra thinking has gone on  we've got hand sanitiser and wipes for the pens and we've got to stand this far [1.5 metres] away," she said. "Even things like signing documents [have had to be considered]. "It's really hard to show someone where they need to sign the document when you can't get within 1.5 metres of them. "I've never had so many little sticky notes over the documentation." This month the Federal Government announced it was waiving registration fees for celebrants from July 1. Ms Ritchie said the move was a welcome relief for many in her industry. While some treat being a celebrant as a side hustle, many celebrants work full-time in the profession. Bendigo celebrant, Rosemary Taylor, said she had one wedding cancelled, another that went ahead during the lockdown, and a couple of ceremonies rescheduled for next year. She said one couple planned to come down from Brisbane and have the wedding in Bendigo because the bride had family there. "She rang me and said, 'We're going to cancel the whole thing and just have a registry office wedding on the Gold Coast'," Mrs Taylor said. "They just decided to keep it low key. "There are other brides [and grooms] that are just waiting to see and hoping it will be ok." Mrs Taylor has a wedding booked for June 21, but it was still up in the air. "It has [affected business] but it's swings and roundabouts," she said. "I'll probably be twice as busy next year." Where and when you have your wedding in Australia will dictate how many invites you are allowed to send out. The Northern Territory has not specified a limit on outdoor weddings, and in Queensland the current 10-person limit is set to increase to 20 from June 12 and up to 100 from July 10. West Australian weddings can have up to 20 people inside or 30 people outside. Ten guests can also attend a wedding in New South Wales right now, not including the couple, celebrant and photographer. Victoria has a similar rule; 10 guests plus the couple and celebrant and the same applies in Tasmania. The Australian Capital Territory also has a 10-person rule for weddings but it differs slightly in that the number includes the couple, but does not include the celebrant and photographer. South Australia also includes the couple in their 10-person limit but not the celebrant or "necessary staff". 
Coronavirus lockdown to lift on June 5 for NT remote communities, Chief Minister says
The Northern Territory Government has confirmed restrictions on travel within the NT will be lifted on June 5. Chief Minister Michael Gunner said the Biosecurity Act  limiting travel to remote communities  would be removed almost two weeks ahead of schedule after consultation with land councils and traditional owners. "We can lift our biosecurity zones safely because of our strict border controls. It's been weeks since we've had a new case, and Territorians are doing the right thing," Mr Gunner wrote on Facebook. "I know it hasn't been easy, but soon, Territorians will be able to move freely between communities and come into town and return home again without having to quarantine." Mr Gunner said the NT's interstate travel restrictions would remain in place indefinitely and the Queensland, WA and South Australian borders would stay closed. The Biosecurity Act was originally due to expire on June 18, but land councils lobbied strongly for the restrictions to lift on June 5  the same day as stage-three coronavirus restriction easing in the Northern Territory. In advocating the June 5 date, Central Land Council chief executive Joe Martin-Jard said the isolation of residents in remote communities was creating barriers to essential supplies, including warm clothing. "We don't want to see double standards emerging where people could get a laksa at Parap Markets and have a bet at the pub from June 5, but the community mob are still locked in," Mr Martin-Jard said. The NT Government moved swiftly to restrict access to remote communities, where Indigenous populations suffer disproportionate levels of chronic disease that are risk factors for coronavirus. Following the announcement of relaxed travel restrictions within the Territory, the NT Government launched a tourism initiative encouraging residents to "get out and enjoy their backyard". Tourism Minister Lauren Moss said the $200,000 campaign dubbed 'Time to be a Territorian' would nudge NT residents to spend on local holidays and provide operators with some relief from the multi-million-dollar revenue blackhole left due to interstate and international border closures. "Over the last few months we've sacrificed a lot to keep Territorians safe. We've looked out for each other, and now we need to keep looking out for each other by experiencing as much of our own backyard as we can," Ms Moss said. "Following[the] announcement thatbiosecurity restrictionswill be removed from5 June, we are encouraging locals to begin planning experiences like a fishing charter, a water cruise, a cultural experience or an overnight stay, which are crucial to supporting our tourism sector. "It's still going to be incredibly tough, because obviously we have a smaller population in the Territory, but I think this will help tour operators adapt to what the new normal looks like for them." Ms Moss said she believed remote communities would "welcome the opportunity to travel freely around the NT and welcome people back into their communities". "We know that land councils and traditional owners have been working with both levels of government on the lifting of biosecurity zones," she said. 
Family self-isolate from coronavirus pandemic in outback Queensland 'oasis'
Keiran Lusk feels strangely liberated by living in coronavirus enforced isolation in outback Queensland. He mows the law in his undies if he feels like it, plays loud music and lifts rocks to keep fit  and couldn't care less what people think about him. He and his young family have paused an epic road trip in a renovated bus to sit out the pandemic as caretakers of a remote property, almost 750 kilometres west of Brisbane. "Living in isolation has provided me with a unique opportunity to be myself," he said. "I am happier and more at peace with myself than I've been in years." With no confirmed coronavirus cases in the region, no neighbours and no visitors, they are far from the stress and anxiety of illness, lockdowns and movement restrictions. "It does feel very surreal out here, we're not affected in anyway, I almost feel a little bit guilty," he said. "It's a very special place to ride out a pandemic, you couldn't ask for better." Mr Lusk is no stranger to isolation. He spent five years living on Moreton Island off the coast of Brisbane, working as a park ranger on the third biggest sand island in the world. "It's like the lighthouse  it's the same sort of remoteness out here," he said. "We actually feel like we're living a similar sort of life that we lived on the island." Mr Lusk spent two years converting an old bus into a mobile home and late last year he and his wife Sam sold up and the family hit the road. "We've been on the road in Bronte the bus for over six months now," he said. "In recent months, we've been slowly plodding around western Queensland and free camping by outback rivers and little country towns, but our plans changed somewhat with the emergence of COVID-19, travel restrictions and nationwide lockdowns. "With no home to return to and camping areas, parks and reserves closing, we were fortunate to find somewhere nearby to stop for a while." They are now caretaking a remote homestead west of Charleville, called Lass O'Gowrie. "We're maintaining the beautiful gardens  it had a prize-winning garden, beautiful lush lawns, it's like an oasis," Mr Lusk said. "We're growing veggies, we've got lots of space and room to move. "The house hasn't got any furniture, but we don't care.  "We're living in the bus at the front door and the boys have got a dedicated Lego room, dedicated Monopoly and games rooms in the house  it's great. "It's wonderfully safe  if it wasn't for the flies we might live here forever." Mr Lusk is conscious that things could have been very different for his family if they had still been in Brisbane during the coronavirus pandemic. "I speak to friends and family in Brisbane, and I guess they're seeing the first hand results of the employment crisis and people that are out of work and shops that are closed  we don't see any of those impacts out here," he said. He said their days had taken on a particular rhythm. Mr Lusk is home-schooling his two boys while his wife works remotely as a public servant. "We're old hands at home-schooling  I wouldn't say that makes us good though," he said, laughing. "It's a lot of work, but having the kids around 24/7 it's wonderful quality time and it's really beautiful to be able to watch the boys develop and spend time with them every day." While reluctant to offer advice on how to deal with life in isolation, Mr Lusk said he had some strategies that had been working for him during these strange times. Be kind to yourself "As someone who has struggled with anxiety and depression over the years, the current opportunity to live in almost complete isolation has been strangely beneficial for me," he said. "I'm learning to be kind to myself. It is OK to have good days and it's OK to have not-so-good days." Have a routine "We are creatures of habit and enjoy having a routine and this has been particularly important," he said. Enjoy being yourself "Living in isolation has provided me with a unique opportunity to be myself, without the fear of others judging me, which is something I've struggled with all my life," he said. "If I want to water the veggie garden or mow the lawn in my undies, then I do it, although this strategy may not work so well for city folk. "Just find time to do the things that make you happy." Exercise "I've set myself a goal to come out of this isolation period feeling much more fit and healthy," he said. "Some mornings I get up early and take a solo ride on my bike around the property. "I'm also exercising with rocks each day  I call it 'rocksercising'  and have a pair of rocks outside the front door and whenever I leave the bus to go anywhere, I do some weights with my rocks as I walk." Sunshine "There is something magic about getting a little bit of sunshine each day," he said. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Mr Lusk said the family would get back on the road in the coming months. "I think we're keen to continue our travels when it is safe and when we're welcome to do so," he said. "This is just a staging ground where we can ride out the crisis and, when travel restrictions are lifted and towns are ready to welcome visitors back, we'll hit the road again." He said he knew his family were "incredibly lucky and fortunate to be where we are during this time". "We do appreciate how privileged we are to be in this situation too  it's not something that we're gloating about or feeling boastful," he said.  "I guess we're just very appreciative of the circumstances that we've found ourselves in". 
When coronavirus arrived these students' worlds turned upside down
The themes of safety and isolation feature in the artwork of two Queensland students who have documented their drastically changed world during COVID-19.  Year 12 student Lateisha Hurst, 17, created illustrations for her school yearbook combining native birds and symbols of the pandemic such as masks and hand sanitiser. Meanwhile, art student Ben Watson, 19, photographed both himself and his grandparents wearing personal protective equipment for his university assignment.  Lateisha, a vice captain at Noosa District State High School, remembers clearly the moment COVID-19 turned her world upside down. "It was on the news, and then the next day I went to work [at a local supermarket] and I had to change everything I was doing," she said. "We had to wipe down the benches after every customer and make sure we were all sanitised so we didn't pass [the virus] on to anyone."  Then school closed and Lateisha was navigating online learning and separated from her friends. "It was really hard  it was all online and we had to relearn everything  it was a big change," she said. "And I really liked hanging out with my friends. "It's a big part of who I am, so that was hard." Lateisha said returning to school was "one of the best feelings". "Just getting back to all my friends was a big part of that, and probably because everyone was in it together," she said. When she drew illustrations for the school's 2020 yearbook, titled Yali, which means "to call" in the local Gubbi Gubbi dialect, she captured the memories of COVID-19. "When we look back on our yearbook, we can think, 'Wow, all this actually happened'," Lateisha said. "I thought it was important to have a statement on the impact of COVID on our community, and how it's also affecting the environment. "We've seen so many animals that have come out into new places where they haven't before because of how populated those areas are. "So it's been a big change not for just the community but also for our wildlife." Lateisha said her main "takeaway" from living through the global pandemic was to see people could be more considerate of each other. "We have seen people working together and actually thinking about other people, where before COVID it wasn't as much," she said. Lateisha said the pandemic experience has made her determined to achieve her dreams of becoming a primary school teacher when high school ends. "I want to help people," she said. Creating a lasting visual record of the pandemic also became the focus for University of the Sunshine Coast (USC) photography students. Lecturer in photography, Tricia King, said her students had to quickly adapt a photo documentary project that was meant to be a narrative shadowing someone as the weeks went on. "At the start of the year, they could have photographed anything in the world but [as COVID struck] they have a very restricted pool of subjects," she said.  "So, we have actually documented the change in just a few weeks from going outside, to taking photos from the car only, to not going outside at all." Capturing history as it happened was a deeply personal project for 19-year-old USC student, Ben Watson. Over a period of three weeks he documented the change in his grandparents' daily lives during isolation, photographing them safely through windows, or wearing personal protection equipment and using a zoom lens to maintain a safe social distance inside the home. His images captured the additional care his grandmother has been giving his grandfather with dementia. "My grandma could no longer go out and do leisure activities or invite visitors home," Mr Waton said. "She had to stop carers coming to the house  she didn't want herself or my grandpa in contact from the coronavirus. "It's a very different world." Mr Watson said as a result of the social restrictions his grandfather's behaviours had altered a lot. "This was a very big change in my grandpa's routine," he said. "Now he spends a lot more time in his room alone." With restrictions easing, Mr Watson can now visit his grandparents without a mask but his images of their time in isolation have become a powerful and personal record of a historic time. The project has also fuelled his creative ambitions. "I put my heart and soul into this project," he said.  "My plan is to do something with photography when I graduate, like more photojournalism work." 
Canberra's coronavirus field hospital looks likely to go unused  and authorities say that's the best possible outcome
It belongs amid the ruins of a war-torn city, or in a rural village grappling with the horrors of famine. Instead, it sits on a suburban cricket field, in the heart of an affluent city, in one of the richest and most developed nations on Earth. It was built to prop up a healthcare system, facing a test for which it was not prepared. But the pop-up emergency department, constructed in just 37 days beside the Canberra Hospital on Garran Oval, will now likely sit idle and may never see a patient. According to the decision-makers who commissioned the $23 million project, it was an insurance policy, taken out as they faced an escalating health crisis both across the globe and within Australia. And they say that as the call was made, they feared it might already be too little, too late. To understand why the facility was built, we need to think back just eight weeks. The idea was first raised on March 20, and a decision was made to push ahead with building the facility on March 22. ACT Health Minister Rachel Stephen-Smith said politicians were watching case numbers soar, nationwide. "In Australia  we were starting to get really increased numbers of COVID-19 cases, day on day," she said. "And we were on that exponential part of the curve of COVID-19 cases." Advice was being handed to National Cabinet around what sort of capacity might be needed, which was then being passed on to state and territory health systems to transform into reality. Hospital capacity, particularly in intensive care, would in some cases need to double or even triple. Maps were drawn outlining how capacity could be extended across the ACT's health system, but Ms Stephen-Smith said they knew time was not a luxury they could afford. "What we had seen in other countries around the world was, by time they needed to make decisions to expand their health system capacity, it was too late," she said. "They were already overwhelmed. "It was really clear to us that we could not afford to be in that situation, that we had to ensure that our health system would have the capacity to cope with what we saw potentially coming down the track." And she, along with counterparts across the country, feared they may have already been caught out. "I think at that time I, and health ministers around the country, and first ministers, were extremely concerned that it was already too late," she said. "That all of the measures we were putting in place wouldn't be quick enough to actually flatten that curve, and that we would see hundreds and thousands of cases of COVID-19 in each of our major cities." Inside the health system, by late March, the global coronavirus situation was already having a clear impact locally. Supply chains for critical medical equipment were breaking down world-wide, and Canberra staff were anxious. Ordinary surgical masks, which usually cost 17 cents, skyrocketed in price to over $1. And where you could usually order as many as needed, and have them delivered in less than 24 hours, orders were being placed with no confidence as to when they might arrive. Deputy CEO of Canberra Health Services Dave Peffer said those were the circumstances decisions were being made in, and no one knew what was coming next. "Things were moving so rapidly that at that point in time, the uncertainty was so great, you really had to plan for what could potentially be a catastrophe," he said. Aspen Medical was contracted to build a pop-up emergency facility, and Garran Oval  directly across the road from Canberra Hospital  was identified as the best possible site. It would be 51 beds, and act as an emergency ward dedicated to both suspected and confirmed COVID-19 patients. On April 2, the facility was publicly announced, and fences were erected around where the site would stand. A total of $23 million was budgeted for the construction and operation, and the ACT Government would take ownership of the facility and all equipment. The World Health Organisation was consulted during the design and construction phase for advice. As an emergency department, it would both treat and triage patients  with all patients leaving within 24 hours, either discharged or admitted to another ward of the hospital. Among the 51 beds, six were equipped for resuscitation, and one for palliative care. Mr Peffer said as they looked abroad, it seemed like exactly the sort of facility that might be required. "We had health services around the world, good health services, crumbling under the weight of a pandemic," he said. "And the lessons we took away from that is often it was governments moving too slowly. "Where we had a situation with health services being underprepared, under resourced, and then very quickly overwhelmed. "The decision that was taken here was we weren't going to follow that path." The field hospital was assembled with extraordinary speed, and made from parts that could eventually be pulled apart and stored in shipping containers. The keys were handed to Canberra Health Services this week, but, beyond security guards, it largely sits empty. Beds line the halls and curtains hang from the roof, while a small array of medical equipment sits on shelves. Were it to be needed, it would take another three weeks to activate  with staff, gear, medicine and other necessities to be brought online. With no active cases of coronavirus in the ACT, that now seems unlikely. Instead, the hospital will probably be disassembled at the end of the flu season, packed up and sold to whoever needs it next. It is, undoubtedly, an expensive insurance policy. If it is not activated, the final cost will come in around $14 million, rather than $23 million. It is also unusual. Few similar facilities are being built around Australia, although the ACT Government pointed to a project at Monash Hospital in Victoria as an example. Despite this, Ms Stephen-Smith said it was the right response. "This is a global pandemic of the size that we haven't seen for 100 years, and it wouldn't be reasonable to build a health system with enough capacity to respond to a once in 100-year pandemic, and then have it sitting there empty for most of the time," she said. "That actually wouldn't be a good way to manage the public's resources and to plan in our health system." 
How WA coronavirus health operations chief Liz McLeod readied the state for an unprecedented pandemic
As Liz McLeod looks back on the past 12 weeks, she feels as though she has been given the gift of time. She watched as a never-before-seen virus broke out and began to spread across the world, killing at first hundreds, then thousands of people as it edged closer and closer to Western Australia. She was about to face a massive professional upheaval. Latest information from the WA Health Department Mrs McLeod was pulled from her role as chief executive of the East Metropolitan Health Service and found herself in a newly-created role  the chief executive of COVID Health Operations.  This made her the head of the team responsible for making sure Western Australia's hospitals and health system were ready for whatever COVID-19 brought with it. And that was a whole lot of unknowns. "One of the challenges we had in this whole process has really been a lack of modelling of what we were going to expect," she says. "It's been quite a moving plan in terms of understanding how many people we thought were going to be coming to our hospitals and also when they were going to be coming." Like the rest of the world, Mrs McLeod saw images of hospitals being overwhelmed in China, Italy and New York. She saw countries running out of hospital equipment like life-saving ventilators, while medical staff were rationing PPE (personal protective equipment). It was now her job to make sure those scenes weren't repeated in Western Australia.  "We were always thinking we were two weeks away from a very large surge of patients arriving," she says. WA hospitals have an emergency plan that is updated regularly, but Mrs McLeod says it was quickly evident that COVID-19 was a different beast and preparations would have to be unlike anything West Australians had seen. "What we knew was that COVID spreads quickly and we get that exponential growth in people with COVID," she says. Early advice for her team was to triple the state's hospital emergency department capacity and double the number of intensive care beds. "We had to work hard and we had to work fast to be as ready as we could be," she says. By March 10, WA had six confirmed cases of the virus and special COVID clinics were set up to test people returning from overseas who had flu-like symptoms. "We were all obviously watching the news and looking to our international colleagues and the evidence of what was happening internationally," Mrs McLeod says. COVID Health Operations, Mrs McLeod's team, made the decision to prepare 660 ICU beds  four times Western Australia's regular capacity. A few days later, as West Australians hit the supermarkets and began panic-buying groceries, her team was busy scrambling to purchase more ventilators for those beds. "Along with being busier in our hospitals, we were also expecting that more of our staff would have been impacted as well," she says When health staff began to fall ill and, in some cases, die overseas, they realised they could have an even bigger challenge on their hands. In anticipation, they launched a statewide recruitment drive. West Australians answered that call in their thousands  more than 7,000 of them applied. By the last week of March, WA was recording between 20 and 44 cases a day and the curve was going up. Her team was working around the clock, long days that bled into weeks.  But then, Western Australia turned a corner. On March 24, WA closed its interstate border and, by the start of April, even travel within the state was restricted. Along with 14-day quarantine periods introduced for people coming into the state, it meant rates of infection began to slow. WA has closed its borders to the east for the first time in history. Here's how you might be affected. "We were certainly expecting it to be a lot busier than what eventuated," Mrs McLeod says. By the start of May, WA had recorded its first full week with no new coronavirus cases. "We look back at it and it has been an extraordinary effort  the fantastic public health response and the fantastic response of the public has given us the gift of time," she says. Fortunately for Mrs McLeod and her team, the elusive two-week surge has still not eventuated. But that doesn't mean her team will rest easy.  "I think we're winning, but I don't think we're there yet. We've still got a long way to go  this is a marathon, not a sprint," she says. Western Australia started to ease more restrictions from May 18, with people allowed back into pubs, cafes and gyms, students heading back to school and some intrastate borders reopened.  Here's a guide to help you work out what will be allowed from May 18 and what is still offlimits. Now hospitals remain on alert for a second wave of infection. "We are still expecting there to be cases so we will maintain our alertness and readiness for some time," Mrs McLeod says. It's that gift of time she speaks of that has allowed her team to get ahead of demand and even update their emergency plans.  "We have to balance our optimism with caution, so we have to remain vigilant and remain ready to respond," she says. While a vaccination for COVID-19 remains a distant promise, she has one message for the people of WA. "We haven't finished yet, I think we are still only in the early days of COVID." 
Consortium launched amid coronavirus to make Aussies eat their fruit and vegetables
For many Australians, eating fruit and vegetables is a tough sell. Government data shows only 7 per cent of adults and 5 per cent of children eat sufficient serves of vegetables, while half of adults and two-thirds of children eat enough fruit. A new national body has been established to change our consumption habits and help the farmers who grow fresh produce. The Fruit and Vegetable Consortium is made up of 11 members including Nutrition Australia, AUSVEG, the Cancer Council of Victoria and various government bodies. Its chair, Lucinda Hancock, said there was a need for a consolidated national approach. "There's been a number of peak bodies in their own rights, however what hasn't happened is a collaboration between health research and also the vegetable industry and market authority," she said. "Really, that's been the missing piece which I think is absolutely vital. "If we don't pull together, I think the success of a campaign is minimal, hence why we really need the group." Ms Hancock said she believed Australians were confused over what to do with vegetables. "I think that for a lot of people, cooking skills are lacking and in the era of Uber Eats, a lot more people are eating takeaway, so they don't know how to prepare, store or what to do with leftovers," she said. "There's a perceived cost with vegetables and, of course, taste preference  people just don't naturally love vegetables." James Whiteside, chief executive of AUSVEG, agreed there was an issue with getting Australians to eat fruit and veg. "Our fruit consumption is a lot better than our vegetable consumption," he said. "We don't appreciate the nutritional value enough, even though we're told that they're good for us. "We're not good at creatively finding delicious ways to eat the product. "In some cases, there's a perception they're labour-intensive and require some effort to cook, which is not necessarily the case." The consortium hopes to address other factors affecting consumer habits, including cost, availability and supply. "Our plan would be to ensure that vegetables are available, and if we're in a really good position with the campaign with increased demand, hopefully we can also advocate to government to subsidise the cost of more expensive vegetables," Ms Hancock said. "What's really important is everybody has a right to consume vegetables equally and should be able to afford them." The campaign, while still in the works, hopes to have similar success to the Life Be In It and Slip, Slop, Slap commercials, and the more recent Eat Australian Lamb ads by the Meat and Livestock Australia. "These campaigns have perennially changed how we we behave  that's the sort of investment that you need to make," Mr Whiteside said. "It's probably going to take a period of five to seven years." In recent months, producers have reported an increase in demand for home-delivered fruit and vegetable boxes, particularly organic produce. Although Australia doesn't have a clear definition to certify organic produce, organic farming is known to use no man-made fertilisers, pesticides, growth regulators or livestock feed additives. Kristen Ottaway, who runs an organic online supermarket, said her business gathered produce from 22 farmers and delivered it throughout Brisbane. "We were sitting at around about 300 to 350 boxes a week before COVID hit, and then we skyrocketed to about 800 boxes a week overnight," Ms Ottaway said. While the surge was encouraging, farmers have seen demand steady as the pandemic goes on. Anthony Bauer, one of the country's largest suppliers of organic vegetables, said he recorded a large increase in demand in March. "When coronavirus hit, we had up to 400 per cent growth in the first few weeks, then it obviously settled down," he said. "We're maintaining now 30 per cent growth." Mr Bauer said he welcomed the introduction of the consortium. "We definitely need it. We need consumers to be putting more focus, more value, on fruit and veg," he said. "It's an important part of everyone's life and everyone's diet."  Watch this story on ABC TV's Landline at 12:30pm or oniview. 
Who's leading the race? A guide to coronavirus vaccines in the pipeline
There are more than 100 coronavirus vaccines in the pipeline and almost a dozen that have made it to human trials so far. But which one  if any  will be the panacea to the COVID-19 pandemic is still anyone's guess. Researchers working to develop a SARS-CoV-2 vaccine face a unique and significant set of challenges  not to mention the fact they're trying to do it in record time. While it will be some months before we know whether any of the proposed vaccines are effective, initial safety trials and encouraging animal studies show promising early signs. Let's take a closer look at some of the candidates leading the race (remembering those that make it to clinical trials first will not necessarily be the most effective). A quick recap, according to the World Health Organization, as of May 24. While vaccine developers typically follow a linear sequence (pre-clinical animal studies to Phase 1/2/3/4 human trials), the urgency of COVID-19 means many are speeding up their timelines. In some cases, Phase 1 and 2 trials are being squashed together (testing safety and effectiveness of the vaccine at the same time), or Phase 1 human safety trials are running before animal efficacy data is in. This week, all eyes were on an experimental vaccine produced by American biotech company Moderna  the first coronavirus vaccine to be tested in humans back in March.  On Monday, the biotech firm announced its RNA vaccine, which was given to 45 healthy individuals in a Phase 1 trial, appeared to be safe and promote an immune response against COVID-19. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Unlike more traditional vaccines, which contain a weakened version of the actual virus or portions of it, Moderna's vaccine is based on a new technology that involves taking genetic material from the virus and delivering it to healthy cells. Using messenger RNA (or mRNA), the vaccine carries instructions to the body to create the SARS-CoV-2 protein the vaccine is aiming to protect against. The idea is that the body detects the genetic material and new protein as foreign, and mounts an immune response  producing antibodies that learn to remember and fight the virus if the body encounters it again. Without publishing its findings in full, Moderna said preliminary data of eight people in its trial showed participants developed neutralising antibodies (which stop the virus replicating) at levels similar to people who have recovered from COVID-19. The findings, though limited, sent the company's share price soaring. But it later dropped when Medical news website STAT reported the figures "don't mean much on their own, because critical information  was withheld", including information about the other 37 trial participants. Like all vaccine candidates, Moderna's findings need to be repeated in much larger Phase 2 (and eventually Phase 3) clinical trials to prove the vaccine actually works. These are expected to begin soon. Meanwhile, two other genetic vaccines for COVID-19 have also made it to human trials  one from American biotech firm Inovio, and another jointly developed by pharmaceutical giant Pfizer and German company BioNTech. Inovio, which has enrolled 40 people in a phase 1 trial of its DNA vaccine, is expected to publish its results in early June. Pfizer, on the other hand, has begun delivering doses of its RNA vaccine to 360 volunteers in the US as part of a Phase 1/2 trial. The drug maker and its German partner said if the vaccine proved to be safe and effective, it could potentially be ready for US distribution by the end of the year. Kylie Quinn, a vice-chancellor's research fellow at RMIT University, said although genetic vaccines are relatively easy and inexpensive to produce, none have been approved for human use before. "We don't know how they're going to perform in humans, but the advantage of them is that they are very quick in terms of design and manufacturing, and should be relatively safe," said Dr Quinn. Using an entirely different approach, scientists at Oxford University's Jenner Institute recently announced a coronavirus vaccine they are working on appears to be protective in monkeys. The vaccine is already being tested in humans. According to a preliminary research paper  which has not yet been peer-reviewed  the vaccine candidate provided protection in six rhesus macaque monkeys who were vaccinated and then exposed to high levels of SARS-CoV-2. The animals had less of the virus in their lungs and airways when compared to non-vaccinated animals, and were protected from developing pneumonia. Oxford's vaccine candidate is known as a viral vector vaccine, and is one of several being developed for COVID-19. These vaccines work by introducing a different type of virus that is engineered to include proteins of the virus the vaccine is aiming to protect against. "You basically take a virus that is generally harmless but can infect cells and you use it like a trojan horse," Dr Quinn said. For the Oxford vaccine, a genetically modified version of a common cold virus (known as an adenovirus) from chimpanzees is being used to carry a protein from SARS-CoV-2 to the body. The goal is to stimulate an immune response and prime the body to respond to any future infection. Unlike most other vaccines, which begin with small clinical trials to demonstrate safety, this vaccine was fast-tracked because the research team had already tested very similar vaccines in humans for other viruses, including MERS and Ebola. Researchers hope to test the vaccine on more than 6,000 people in the UK by the end of May, as part of a Phase 1/2 trial. If those results show the vaccine is effective, they say the first few million doses could be available as soon as September, with emergency approval from regulators. Trevor Drew, director of CSIRO's Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness, said the decision by British drug-maker AstraZeneca to partner with Oxford to manufacture and distribute the vaccine was an encouraging sign. "The Oxford vaccine is really quite a clever one," Professor Drew said. "I think it's probably going to be one of the prime candidates." Besides Oxford, one other viral vector vaccine has made it to human trials. It comes from Chinese vaccine company CanSino. While CanSino is yet to publish detailed results of its Phase 1 trial, its vaccine candidate was the first to reach Phase 2 clinical trials back in April. Three of the remaining vaccines to have made it to human trials are "inactivated" vaccines, which means they contain the actual virus, but it's been killed by being exposed to ultraviolet light or chemicals. "This is a really simple and sometimes very effective way of introducing your immune system to something without having the potential to cause disease," Dr Quinn said. "It's a very old style of vaccine." Inactivated vaccines are slightly different to live attentuated vaccines, which involve introducing a "live" virus into the body, but one that has been weakened. Just a handful of COVID-19 vaccine candidates are using this approach, all still in pre-clinical trials. The three inactivated vaccines that have made it to human trials are being developed in China and are in Phase 1/2 clinical trials, however data from the initial phase 1 trials is limited. One of the vaccine candidates, developed by Chinese biopharmaceutical company Sinovac, was recently shown to be effective in rhesus macaque monkeys, who  like in the Oxford vaccine study  generated neutralising antibodies. "It builds the case that [this vaccine] is possibly viable and worth following up on," Dr Quinn said. The final type of vaccine researchers are pursuing are called subunit or protein vaccines. These contain only a fragment of the virus, rather than the whole thing. US biotech company Novavax recently begun Phase 1 clinical trials in Australia with a subunit vaccine that targets the "spike" protein on the surface of coronvirus particles. It's the same technique being pursued by researchers at the University of Queensland, who are set to begin clinical trials in July. There are pros and cons to every vaccine approach, and it may be that multiple candidates are found to show some protection against COVID-19. No vaccine is 100 per cent effective, and the vast majority of vaccines that make it to clinical trials do not succeed in getting to market. Given the challenges of manufacturing and distributing a vaccine on a global scale, Dr Quinn said it wouldn't be a bad outcome if several candidates were ultimately used. Get the latest health news and information from across the ABC. "Different vaccines have very specific manufacturing requirements," she said. "So perhaps having a few different vaccine formats that each show a level of protecting  we can spread the weight across different manufacturing facilities." Professor Drew said because the COVID-19 vaccine development timeline was being compressed, and some of the longer-term effects would be unknown, the decision to roll it out  if an effective vaccine was found  would likely be based on each country's individual level of risk. "How urgent is the vaccine needed, and what are the potential benefits against some of the more minor risks?" he said. "In the current situation with COVID-19, a lot of those decisions may be made with the acceptance [that] there may be some minor downstream issues, but certainly no worse than the current suffering that's being created by the disease itself."  
Coronavirus restrictions see 1930's Central Cookery Book become a bestseller
When Michael Roach first took over The Book Cellar in Tasmania's Campbell Town, he never thought a cookbook written in 1930 would be a bestseller. His book store, almost hidden off the typically bustling Midland Highway, is located underground in the convict cellars of heritage property Foxhunters Return, an 1830's-era coaching inn. Pride of place in the store's entry, surrounded by original sandstone walls, sits the bestsellers list, one of which is Alice Irvine's Central Cookery Book. "Since the coronavirus shutdowns, it's been our most popular book," Michael said. It's now in its 16th edition and is a cooking staple for many Tasmanian households. "It's very well known in the Tasmanian community", said Mr Roach. "A lot of parents have sent their children off with a copy when they leave home and I think that tradition has continued and pushed forward a bit during the crisis because people are returning to the basics." It's also recently gained an appetite internationally. "We've sold copies recently to Hawaii, of all places. In one weekend we sold a few online over there, which is great," he said. "What makes it interesting is this book has no pictures, it's very basic, it's a starter cookbook. "Some of the recipes include how to boil an egg, how to do the most basic things that the big cookbooks just dont touch. "It's not uncommon for people to buy several copies at once and send them off to grandchildren and that sort of thing." During the 1970s, it was a key text in Tasmanian classrooms. Ena Rigney has been teaching home economics in Launceston for 17 years and has fond memories of using the book at home as a child. "I grew up with the Central Cookery Book, it was one of the very few recipe books we had at home: being a Dutch migrant, recipe books were scarce," she said. "It was the one I used at school while studying and it has become a favourite of mine over the years. "It's how I learned to cook and I still use it while teaching my classes now. "I can probably recall 20 recipes from the book off the top of my head that I still use. "The simplicity chocolate cake, for example, was always a wonderful, easy-to-make chocolate cake because it was a melt-and-mix method and not many are a melt-and-mix method nowadays." Janelle Scott has worked alongside Ena for almost a decade at Launceston Church Grammar School and has similar memories of using the cookbook. "It's been a great, trusted recipe book, all of the recipes have been tested, which is really good to know. I still use the book as a reference in my classes," she said. "It's almost 90 years old and it's still a Tasmanian classic." "All the recipes are heart-warming, easy to understand and the ingredients aren't expensive for families." Janelle said one reason for its continued popularity over the years is people referring back to it to find an old recipe their grandparents or relatives used to make. "If people have memories of certain meals they ate when they were younger, for example, this book would probably be a good starting point to find out how it was made," she said. According to the Department of Education, the Central Cookery Book has been updated since it was first published by a group of Tasmanian teachers. The Department said it's no longer a set text in classrooms but is referred to along with a range of other books and online resources. Adriana Taylor, from the Country Women's Association, said it's understandable people are reaching for easy and familiar recipes during the pandemic. "There's a level of comfort in home cooking, using fresh produce from your garden and making a meal to share with your family or friends is really special," she said. "I hope people will have a lot more confidence in themselves once COVID-19 ends, in being able to get an easy meal ready quickly and easily and also just things like breakfasts, anyone can really do smashed avocado on toast." "Now people will be able to make decent pasta and pasta sauces. I hope people will continue to cook at home." Mother-of-two Cassandra Sheehan is one of many Tasmanians who've been spending more time cooking. "I used to bake before this period but we've definitely been doing more recently," she said. "My daughter wanted to make a Boston bun like the bakery, so we did a Boston bun, we've done bread, home-made pizza bases, things for the kids' lunches: muffins, cakes, a lot of experimenting. It's been fun, the kids love it!" "I think everyone should give it a go, you get a lot of enjoyment out of it. I do still call mum and ask 'how do you do such-and-such?', but that's all part of it." Alice Christina Irvine was born in the mining town of Mathinna in 1879. According to records from the Tasmanian Honour Roll of Women, she was educated at Mangana State School and began her career as a teacher at Mathinna State School in 1897. In 1906, Alice attended the Melbourne Training College as a cookery student and in 1926 attended the Emily MacPherson College of Domestic Economy in Melbourne. Upon her return to Tasmania, Alice started writing a text for cookery education. First published around 1930, the Central Cookery Book was intended for use in Tasmanian domestic science classes. It's now become one of the most published and widely utilised texts in Tasmania. Miss Irvine died in November 1940 from cancer. She was inducted into the Tasmanian Honour Roll of Women in 2009 for services to Education and Training. 
Beef producers face 'long-term uncertainty' as coronavirus hits export market, but domestic demand surges
Beef is among the growing list of industries dealing with ramifications of the coronavirus, with the sector experiencing export bans, increased freight costs and a significant drop in overseas demand. AgForce says there has been a noticeable shift in the perception of the agricultural sector in favour of producers and farmers Josie and Blair Angus run 35,000 head of cattle on their property near Moranbah, 200 kilometres south-west of Mackay in central Queensland. They sell beef to 30 countries across the world. "Uncertainty is probably the best way to describe it  and volatility," Ms Angus said. "We had the hunger games at the start, where domestically the retail demand appeared insatiable, and I guess we've obviously had chain disruptions around air trade internationally. "It's been patchy and interesting and I think, now moving forward, the uncertainty is probably the biggest factor." The abattoir where the Anguses were sending some of their stock was one of the four impacted by China's banned exports, but that was not the only market affecting their business.  The couple supply beef to restaurants, butchers and wholesalers across Australia and overseas. "We've seen massive impacts in the Middle East, for instance, where we had a focus on the UAE and Dubai and such a heavy tourist influenced economy," Ms Angus said. "We've seen a massive drop-off in demand there. "Now we've just got that longer-term bit of uncertainty; where's this all going to end?" In a silver lining to the pandemic, domestic demand for beef has surged. Peter Boodle is a butcher in Rockhampton and he lost 50 per cent of trade to local restaurants and cafes when they were forced to shut their doors.  But consistent demand to put food on the table has turned that around. "Since the coronavirus started we were a little bit worried  but we're actually up in sales," Mr Boodle said. "Even though our wholesale and restaurant trade is down 50 per cent, our retail is up 50 [per cent] as well. "We're actually doing better than what we were before coronavirus started." Mr Boodle put the increase in retail demand down to people getting more creative in the kitchen as they looked to make nicer meals at home. "They're becoming their own chefs, they're asking for better cuts," he said. "Our customer count's probably up around 400 customers a week." Terry Nolan is the director of a cattle processing facility near Gympie in south-east Queensland. He said he has seen a strong increase in business because of the coronavirus restrictions. "In our business about 60 to 70 per cent is for the Australian and domestic market and Australian retail trade," Mr Nolan said. "There's an increase in retail trade, and it's probably no surprise that people out here have sought comfort food. "I would say, in those first two weeks of lockdown [from] mid-March to [the] end of March, some retailers would have doubled their sale of meat which is a great story for the beef industry." He said a lot of producers have not felt the brunt of the pandemic yet because of the length of the supply chain in the cattle industry. "To some degree they've been insulated to the COVID effect," Mr Nolan said. "There may be a lag time down the track and who knows with the talk of China. "Hopefully that's only [a] temporary suspension of those plants and we can be back going there in six months. "But it's a long and complex supply chain and lots of people are impacted at different times." AgForce cattle board chair, Will Wilson, said the industry was in a rebuild phase following drought, meaning the current situation was good for producers. "It's a supply and demand market  so while we're building supply, the demand is high and that's been noticeable and good for producers as far as value proposition goes," he said. Mr Wilson says while the international export industry is uncertain, producers are taking it as it comes. "At the end of the day it's just a volatile situation for [the] market so we'll see what happens in the future," he said. Mr Wilson said another positive of the pandemic for the agricultural sector has been a shift in perception of the industry from the broader community. "It really seems now people are concerned about where their next feed is going to come from and what's important to them," he said. "As an industry it's no secret that we've been struggling to deliver the message that we do care about our land and our animals  this has been a real assistance in getting that message across. "You actually get an opportunity to prove you are doing your best to feed the world, and look after the animals and the land." 
Muslims struggling through coronavirus helped with food parcels during Ramadan
For many families, the evening meal during the month of Ramadan is a time of joy and reflection spent with friends and family.  Prayers at packed mosques, warm hugs and mouth-watering foods a traditional centrepiece.  Muslims across Australia are breaking their day-long fasts differently this year because of coronavirus  and a food deployment operation is helping members of the community who are struggling.  Yusra Metwally is a few hours into her fast as she packs eggs into a food hamper going out with others to Western Sydney suburbs.  The box is halal-friendly and specifically designed for Muslim communities. Ms Metwally knows some will be using this food to celebrate their own iftars  the evening meal in which Muslims end their daily Ramadan fast. "I'm experiencing Ramadan for the first time in isolation and it's been so strange because usually it's such a social time where you break your fast with others.  "But I've come to terms with a changed Ramadan. While we've lost the usual elements like the mosques and socialisation  we haven't lost that sense of community.  Ms Metwally is a volunteer at Addison Road Community Centre Organisation (ARCCO) in Marrickville which seven weeks ago turned into a major food deployment operation to reach vulnerable community members during the COVID-19 crisis.  The community hall which used to hold social functions is now full of fresh fruit and vegetables, refrigerators of eggs and milk and hundreds of cans.  It works like clockwork with volunteers physically distanced at each station as food is packed, labelled, and delivered into vans. Chief Executive of ARCCO Rosanna Barbero is comfortable with managing big-picture logistics in crisis.  She's worked for the United Nations and Oxfam aid operations across the Middle East, Asia and Africa for the last three decades.  "In a couple of hours we repurposed the empty Addison Road community hall into the headquarters  because we knew we'd have to deploy food immediately because people would be in need.  "Particularly those people who have fallen through the cracks or lost jobs." ARCCO has no government funding  and relies on donations and volunteers during this pandemic.  It is focused on servicing gaps in the stimulus packages  targeting refugee and asylum-seeker communities, international students, sex workers and even tourists.  It has been working in food security since 2015 but never quite at this scale.  "This definitely mirrors deployment operations I've worked on," Ms Barbero said. The boxes that Ms Metwally packed are in a van parked in Belmore.  Syeda Shah, a mother of five is one of the first to receive one.  Ms Shah and her family are asylum seekers from northern Pakistan  fleeing persecution for their religion in which the minority Shia-Muslim group are targeted. For the family who live in Georges Hall, food security has always been an issue in their seven years in Australia on bridging visas with minimal government support.  However, the worry to feed her kids this Ramadan increased as prices went up or stock sold quickly in their local grocery stores due to the crisis.  "It's always a big month for Muslims but we can't afford most things," Ms Shah said. "But right now, it's even harder as most prices are up for spices, for rice."  Addison Road was a lifeline. Particularly as extra costs pile up like pre-paid data packs for her husband and their children to rely on to complete studies from home.  They cannot afford a monthly internet plan.  "It's really helped. We've got plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables, and tinned food," Ms Shah said. "Without this we don't have access to fruits and veggies. This the fruit we put in my kids' lunchboxes the days they go to school." But what Ms Shah loves most is the fact she's always made to feel resilient. "They respect everyone. When they give food they give it with love.  "They never use words like poor or that they're helping 'people like us' which charities often use." While she misses the social gatherings  the work the organisation is doing has embodied the values of Ramadan she holds close.  "Fasting in the time of Ramadan is important as you can understand hunger and the stress of other people who may not have enough food.  "What they're doing here is so important."  
How Victoria's coronavirus restrictions will change from June
Victorians are being told that from next month, the message is shifting from "stay home" to "stay safe", as a raft of coronavirus restrictions ease. But the relaxed restrictions will not change the health advice to maintain a 1.5 metre distance from others, avoid hugging and kissing where possible, and give space to those around you. And those who are vulnerable, such as Victorians over 70, or those with chronic health conditions, are still being urged to think carefully about limiting their interactions in order to reduce the risk of infection. Premier Daniel Andrews has also made clear the changes will only proceed if every Victorian with the slightest of symptoms continues to be tested to maintain what he says are "among the highest test rates in the world". With that in mind, this is what the path out of restrictions for Australia's second most-populous state will look like. While lots of things are loosening up, the direction for every Victorian who is able to work from home to do so remains, at least for the rest of June. "If we have literally hundreds and hundreds of thousands of people returning to office blocks, pressing lift buttons, sharing the kitchen, using common spaces, bathrooms and other spaces like that, then we will simply have this virus get away from us," Mr Andrews said. "It is the greatest risk to a second wave and then all that we're trying to avoid  the notion of having to reimpose some of these rules." While the Premier acknowledged continuing to work from home would be frustrating and difficult for some businesses, Chief Health Officer Brett Sutton said others had discovered its silver lining. He encouraged businesses to think about what they could do with their IT infrastructure or organisation to make working from home sustainable. From June 1, Victorians will be able to have 20 people under the roofs of their homes  but that includes those who live there. So, for example, a family of three will be able to host 17 people in their house. And gatherings outside, such as picnics, will be able to include up to 20 people as well. The Premier has urged people remain mindful of the pandemic and the need for physical distancing. "In all your activities, be considered, be cautious, use your common sense," Mr Andrews said. The limit on the number of people allowed at house inspections and auctions will also rise from 10 to 20, with real estate agents required to keep track of the number of attendees and their contact details. With the bushfires and the pandemic having hammered Victoria's tourism economy, the latest easing of restrictions holds good news, with overnight stays at accommodation and private residences allowed from June 1. That extends to campgrounds and caravan parks, where people will be able to pitch a tent and camp overnight once again. But don't expect communal facilities like kitchens or bathrooms to be available. They'll remain closed to reduce the transmission risk presented by shared spaces. A range of cultural spaces will be allowed to reopen across the month, starting with galleries, museums, drive-in cinemas and historic sites from June 1. Zoos, outdoor amusement parks, libraries, youth centres and community facilities will also be given the green light from the start of the month. Beauty and personal care services like nail salons, spas and tattoo parlours will also reopen, but they will be required to keep the contact details of each customer. All of these places will need to follow physical-distancing directions and a limit of 20 patrons "per space" will apply. Professor Sutton defined a "space" like this: "It's largely about a single, undivided space where you can manage the flow of people going in and out." But the overriding rule of 4 square metres of space per customer still applies, so it's possible some smaller venues won't be able to host the full 20 people. If you're keen to visit Melbourne Zoo, Healesville Sanctuary or Werribee Open Range Zoo, you'll need to plan ahead. They announced they'll be restricting entry tickets to online purchases so they can cap attendance at their zoos to 2,000, 1,500 and 1,000 respectively. So if you turn up without buying ahead, you could be turned away at the gate if they're already at capacity. And the enclosed indoor areas such as the reptile and nocturnal houses will remain closed. If all goes according to plan, on June 22 that limit will be raised to 50 people, with cinemas and theatres finally able to open their doors again. The Premier has stressed coronavirus testing results will inform the easing of restrictions at every step of the way, with a focus on avoiding a scenario where a liberty is offered to businesses that then has to be taken back. "The more people that get tested, the more options we have, to not make changes based on guesswork, but instead to make changes based on what the data is telling us," he said. It's getting easier for Victorians to get out and about for different kinds of exercise, starting with the reopening of public playgrounds and outdoor gym equipment from Tuesday, the same day state schools will welcome back the first wave of students to classrooms. Community sport will be able to run from June 1 provided it's held outdoors or with no more than 20 people in undivided spaces, is non-contact and people are able to play while respecting 1.5 metre physical distancing. Swimming pools will also be able to open, but with that limit of 20 people in place. If community transmission rates remain low and testing rates high, indoor gyms and fitness centres will be able to open their doors again on June 22, with no more than 20 people per space and up to 10 people involved in a group or activity at any one time. June 22 is also the date Victorians (and anyone from interstate for that matter) should be able to take to the state's ski slopes, which are set for a bumper season of snow this year. The limiton funeral attendees has been tough, which may be why it's being relaxed fastest, with up to 50 mourners allowed at funerals from June 1. For weddings, up to 20 people will be allowed, plus the celebrant and couple. The same limit of 20 people will apply to "private worship or small religious ceremonies", in addition to those required to perform the service. While the Government has already announced that restaurants, cafes and the dining section of pubs will be able to reopen from June 1 with a 20-person limit (rising to 50 on June 22), bars and clubs are proving more of a challenge. A city's signature nightlife culture is on life support, with some landmark Melbourne venues already pulling the plug and many more expected to go the same way. "I think indoor gatherings of that nature, where it's not table service, it's  very challenging to maintain social distance and where you've got alcohol being consumed  let's be clear  at a higher level than it might be in other settings  I think that those types of venues are going to be the very last venues to reopen," Mr Andrews said. "They would have to look very, very different and then it'll be a matter of us engaging with that sector to have a conversation with them about whether they want to open up with those rules." If you're after more information, the Department of Health and Human Services has set up a page that breaks this all down in much more detail. 
Coronavirus leaves Sydney man still struggling for breath two months after being discharged
David Allen has been in choirs since he was three years old. Now, the coronavirus survivor struggles to sing at all and runs out of air mid-line. The 32-year-old audiologist from Epping, in Sydney's north-west, was infected with COVID-19 while travelling in Belgium in early March. Doctors say his voice will return but two months after being cleared of the virus, David says he still struggles daily with fatigue and shortness of breath. "There is this moment where every time I push myself beyond what I can to that slightly breathless point, there is this just grinding fear that maybe the next breath won't actually come," he says. Doctors have told him it is normal for a recovery from pneumonia to be about four to six months as the damaged lung linings fix themselves, and encouraged him to keep up singing and walking to build strength. Earlier this month, he wrote about his recovery on social media and says he was inundated with people sharing similar stories of struggling and feeling like they had no-one to talk to.  "It really connected with a lot of people," he says. "The most heartbreaking part of it was the number of people who said 'I know, this is me, this is my experience'. "The discourse is very much about once you are  quote-unquote  'recovered', that somehow your life goes back to normal, and it really doesn't," David says. "We haven't spoken about that story because it's scary, you know? It's really, really scary being a 32-year-old who is unable to walk around the park." David contracted coronavirus at a dance party and admits he was "quite naive" at the time about the risk of infection.  When he got back to Sydney, he had a few days off for jet lag when news emerged of infections from the party and he tested positive on March 16 despite not having any symptoms at that stage.  Two days later, he started having trouble breathing, severe headaches, chills and fatigue. It was like, he says, having flu multiple times over. NSW went into lockdown two days before David was cleared by NSW Health on March 25. By March 27, NSW saw its largest daily case spike to date with 212 confirmed COVID-19 infections. While David was never admitted to hospital for COVID-19, one day, feeling overwhelmed by the isolation and a shortness of breath, he had an anxiety attack, was briefly hospitalised for monitoring and is now on a mental-health plan.  David knows he is fortunate to have emerged at all from the suffocating fog of COVID-19 but says it is not really cause for celebration.  "It's hard to feel lucky when we're talking about the statistics," he says. "I don't feel particularly lucky. I feel grief for so many people who have become sick and those who have died or have ongoing disability." He says what is important to think about is that this is a collective story of trauma and grief for the loss of normal life. "Everybody is traumatised, everybody is hurting," he says. "The big thing that really stands out to me is there's a lot of discussion about getting back to normal. "We need an acknowledgement, a change in our language that it's not about going back to what it was before. It's not about reopening the country, it's about opening it in a new way.  "We are never going back to normal." Professor Tania Sorrell is director of the Marie Bashir Institute for Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity at the University of Sydney and says patients will need to be followed for a long time to fully understand COVID-19 recovery.  "We are really trying very hard to determine exactly when the long-term consequences are and we will need to follow patients for up to two years to be confident that we can be really clear about it," she says.  "I'm certainly aware of individual patients who seem to feel well one day and feel terrible the next, or they look as though they're improving and suddenly there seems to be a relapse," she says. In addition to impacts on the body, it's important to bear in mind mental health, too, she says.  "It's a little bit like post-traumatic stress disorder that patients or individuals can suffer if they've been to war or in any other really stressful condition.  "Under those circumstances, hospitals typically do have support processes for their patients after discharge, which include psychological assessment, social worker assessment as well as follow-up by various clinicians." She said long-term follow-up clinics are being set up and GPs are also undertaking follow-ups. There's also access to support processes such as psychological or social-worker assessment. She says, in general, rest is the best therapy and people like David Allen are doing the right thing by exercising without overdoing it. She says while some analogies can be drawn with other diseases, COVID-19 remains uncharted territory. "We are learning about this  it's a new disease, and that's why as a health care profession we want to keep a very close eye on our patients to make sure that we're not missing something and that we can offer the best support and care that we can." 
Coronavirus means Australia's major events industry will never be the same again
Peter Jones looks at the whiteboard in his North Melbourne office that  ironically, now  he put up just a couple of months ago to visualise his frantic year ahead. "Olympic dinner, gone. Committee for Melbourne event, gone. Starry Night  gone," he says as he places a cross against his list of cancellations. A stalwart of the major events industry, Mr Jones says the pandemic has been "the worst thing you could ever imagine in your wildest dreams for the events industry as a whole". Until now, the authorities' focus has been on reuniting households and allowing small gatherings. But Australia's iconic major events and functions are, at this stage, on hold indefinitely, with no federal guidelines as to how they will be able to return. Industry insiders fear it will be early next year before the multi-billion-dollar industry can start to revive. It's estimated cancellations of both major events and business events will account for a $35 billion loss to the economy in 12 months and more than 92,000 jobs. Mr Jones considers the fate of the AFL parade he's organised for 24 years. "You're talking about an event that takes about eight months to plan, has about two and a half thousand people that are involved in putting it together, the hiring, all of the infrastructure that goes into it, it's broadcast on TV  you can't say, well, we're going to do half of that," he says. Mr Jones says when he recently asked the City of Melbourne for a permit for the parade, "I think they laughed at me". "I was only half joking, knowing what the response would be. They're not in a position to [give a permit]." He says it could be months before those sort of events can happen. "New Year's Eve for councils would have to be a big issue," he says. "We're talking into January, February and March next year of events that may not happen in the same way." He fears many smaller operators in the industry will not be able to ride out the crisis. "We will never ever go back to what we were. And as an industry, we need to adapt." Andrew Westacott was in the unenviable position of presiding over the first major event in Australia to be sucked into the pandemic's vortex: the complex multinational behemoth that is the Formula 1 Grand Prix. Over a number of days before the March event, it was mired in confusion and controversy as drivers wondered aloud why the race was going ahead. Some pulled the pin and flew out, hours before angry fans were eventually told of the cancellation as they gathered outside Albert Park gates on Friday, March 13 (Mr Westacott remembers the date with a slight raise of his eyebrows), just two days ahead of the race. "We were unaware that several of the drivers had caught early morning flights out of Australia," Mr Westacott says in his first on-camera interview since that time. "The decision actually hadn't been officially made by the FAA in Formula One and ourselves until early that morning. "So that took us by surprise, but that was that changing nature of what was happening on many, many different fronts." Mr Westacott had been juggling his international bosses, commercial rightsholders, state and federal health authorities and Australian Border Force. "There were a lot of inputs," he says. Still, weeks later, he says the decision-making was sound. "I actually don't think anything went wrong   [but] I still send our apologies to the fans who had travelled so, so many distances," he says. "I think we made the right decision at the right time." He's upbeat that next year's event will go ahead in some form. "With an open-air park on a very, very large footprint, we actually probably have a lot of benefits over some enclosed spaces," he says. "But there are also some challenges when it comes to temporary infrastructure." Mr Westacott says they extended the bump-out of the event for the contractors who were doing it tough, and are still working their way through refunds and credits for disappointed fans. When asked if he would, like his counterparts at the Australian Open, consider a scenario inviting New Zealand fans over if the "travel bubble" with Australia proceeds, he laughs: "I don't disagree with that sort of principle. One of the things I've always said is that we steal shamelessly." Tennis Australia CEO Craig Tiley watched the unfolding mess at the Grand Prix, knowing he had avoided the viral bullet by mere weeks. "I spoke to Andrew [Westacott] following it. And we felt for Formula One and the organisation, because no one knew," he says. "They were just trying to do what they felt was the best thing at that point in time, not knowing how quickly this thing was moving. "It was heavily criticised for it, but  it totally turned out to be the right decision." Mr Tiley says there are lessons from the Grand Prix's perfect storm of misfortune. "One of the learnings that we have taken from that, and we did this with our organisation, is we've tried to make a decision as early as possible," he says. "And not really knowing if it's the right decision, but making sure that is the best decision for that moment in time." Mr Tiley believes his team was in a better position to handle uncontrollable situations than it might have been, having had its own brush with a natural disaster  choking smoke from bushfires at January's event. Still, he says: "We have no baseline, and no sport and no government has a baseline, on how to manage [these crises]." Tennis Australia is lucky too, to have made the relatively uncommon investment in pandemic insurance, although that runs out in July. The Grand Prix showed the high stakes of a mishandled cancellation and the risks to public confidence and health if a restart is bungled are immense. Mr Tiley says the key will be establishing trust through honest communication with the public. "It has to be authentic, has to be transparent," he says. "I think that's really important, not just for sport, but for everyone to do, because from a leadership point of view, the moment you don't become believable, then you can't get anything done." While Mr Tiley says professional sports are sharing their strategies about how to navigate the murky months ahead, event planner Peter Jones says the wider industry needs to do more. "The industry has actually got to get together for the first time like it probably hasn't [before], and be able to go out with a set of guidelines saying this is the way we will operate," he says. "And that's then going to be communicated to the general public." Anne Jamieson, vice-president of the Victorian Tourism Industry Council, says governments also need to come to the party more when it comes to business events. They are the large conferences, gala dinners, charity events, that are a similarly huge economic driver as major events  bringing in $3.4 billion in Victoria alone, versus $2.5 billion by major events  but without the public profile. "We'd probably like to see a little bit more support come from government," Ms Jamieson says. "I think that we need to be careful that [the sector] doesn't get left behind." And coming back, she says, won't be straightforward. "Somebody's going to have to take the step to actually run an event and test everything that needs to be done from a health and safety perspective, from how they're going to manage delegates, how they're going to manage registrations, et cetera," she says. "They're probably going to have to have an action plan in place for every single event from a health and safety perspective, and actually have a ground crew running every day to make sure that they're mitigating and managing people that are potentially not complying to what they actually need to comply to." Ms Jamieson and Mr Jones fear for the future of networking events, where no streaming platform can replace the buzz and connection that comes with pre-COVID-19 mingling. Mr Jones says to get ready for public events to change forever. "I can still see in years to come, people being checked for health. "People can check for names, where they've been, maybe there is going to be an app that says, 'I've been to the football, I've been here'  that will happen, because we will never ever go back to what we were." 
Dominic Cummings, Boris Johnson adviser and Brexit architect, refuses to resign over lockdown travel during coronavirus
UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson's senior adviser Dominic Cummings is fighting for his job after flouting the Government's coronavirus lockdown rules. Mr Johnson is standing by Mr Cummings despite calls from within his own Conservative Party for the aide to be dismissed for driving 250 miles (400 kilometres) during the coronavirus lockdown. Mr Cummings, one of the key figures in the 2016 Brexit campaign, came under pressure when newspapers reported he had travelled from London to northern England at the end of March, when his wife was ill with COVID-19 symptoms during a nationwide lockdown. Mr Johnson's office said in a statement that Mr Cummings made the trip because his wife was showing coronavirus symptoms, he thought he was likely to also get sick, and his parents had offered to help look after the couple's young son. The statement said Mr Cummings stayed in a house "near to but separate from" his extended family in Durham. The UK's lockdown stipulated that people should remain at home, leaving only for essential local errands and exercise. In a message to the nation on March 23, Mr Johnson said: "From this evening I must give the British people a very simple instruction  you must stay at home". Mr Cummings was seen in London on March 27 but travelled to Durham at some time between then and March 31, according to the BBC. Mr Cummings, who has repeatedly refused to resign, entered 10 Downing Street on Sunday (local time) after some Tory MPs demanded he quit. "It is intolerable that Boris's Government is losing so much political capital," MP Steve Baker wrote on Twitter. "Dominic Cummings must go." Fellow Conservative MPDamian Collinssaid Mr Cummings "has a track record of believing that the rules don't apply to him and treating the scrutiny that should come to anyone in a position of authority with contempt". "The Government would be better without him," he said. Mr Johnson, however, was steadfast in his support of Mr Cummings. "I conclude that in travelling to find the right kind of childcare, at the moment when both he and his wife were about to be incapacitated by coronavirus, and when he had no alternative  I think he followed the instincts of every father, and every parent. And I do not mark him down for that.," Mr Johnson said. "I believe that in every respect he has acted responsibly and legally." Keir Starmer, leader of the Opposition Labour Party, described Mr Johnson's decision to take no action against Mr Cummings as "an insult to the sacrifices made by the British people". "This was a test of the Prime Minister and he has failed it," Mr Starmer said in a statement. The UK Civil Service official Twitter feed posted and then deleted a message which appeared to be a criticism of Mr Johnson's stance. "Arrogant and offensive. Can you imagine working with these truth twisters?" Other prominent British figures have resigned after breaking lockdown rules. Epidemiologist Neil Ferguson quit as a member of the Government's scientific advisory group after he was visited at home by his girlfriend. Scotland's chief medical officer, Catherine Calderwood, stepped down after she was caught making two trips to her second home. On Saturday (local time), when asked if he would resign, Mr Cummings said he acted responsibly and legally and scolded reporters outside his house for getting the 2016 Brexit referendum wrong. "Obviously not," he said of resignation. "You guys are probably all about as right about that as you were about Brexit: do you remember how right you all were about that?" Mr Cummings said. With a total of 260,916 confirmed cases and 36,875 dead, the United Kingdom has the worst official COVID-19 death toll in Europe ABC/Reuters 
Life in coronavirus lockdown brings added heartache for palliative care patients
Kim Bieber broke social and physical distancing rules a few weeks ago and has no regrets. Some might argue she had no choice. "I needed to feel their presence," she says. "My children, my grandchildren. To hold them and tell them I love them." Ms Bieber has terminal cancer and is receiving palliative care. She has been told she has about a week or ten days to live. "It could've been the last time. Every time could be the last time," she says. For several months, the 61-year-old had been enforcing strict social distancing rules. Few people were allowed inside her Fitzroy home in Melbourne's inner north-east, which is decorated with colourful artwork painted by her three grandchildren. The furniture was also moved to ensure that when a nurse or doctor visited, people were kept metres apart. She had been undergoing cancer treatment since Christmas and catching COVID-19, or even the common cold, could have been a death sentence. "We were keeping stricter rules than what you'd see at the supermarket or Queen Victoria Market," she says. "Plus, I didn't want to upset Dan Andrews," she jokes. Even though she needs help from her husband Rafael to walk a few steps, and her speech can be slow, her mind is still quick. But she doesn't joke about how painful isolation from her family has been, as the cancer spread to her brain and the days became shorter and colder. "April was very grey. I hadn't seen my family for months  It was quite a lonely time," she says. "We did Facetime or things like that. It wasn't the same." Thousands of people receiving palliative care in Australia are getting less contact with others, including their nurses, because of the coronavirus restrictions. Anne Myers has been a palliative care nurse with Melbourne City Mission for 14 years. "This is a very difficult situation for people," she says.  "It is bringing in extra ethical and moral decisions for people. What's the best thing to do for a loved one?  "Especially in a PCU [Palliative Care Unit] where only one [a family member] may be allowed to go in." Ms Myers says face-to-face home visits are now only for terminal patients in home care and only then if the family has been screened for coronavirus and if physical-distancing measures are in place. But she says when it comes to treating the dying, and consoling a family, doing it at a distance is difficult. "Eighty per cent of our clients now are probably getting phone calls, whereas before 80 per cent [were] getting visits," she says. "Our role is our relationships with our clients. All that non-verbal stuff  we miss all that and you realise, when you don't have that face-to-face, how needed that is." Ms Bieber makes light of how hard social distancing has been in the grand scheme of things. She says being an "educated white woman" in inner-city Melbourne has given her certain privileges, including receiving palliative care at home. "I have worked with Holocaust survivors," the former psychotherapist says. "I have worked with asylum seekers, refugees. COVID-19 is pretty easy really." She even says having terminal cancer has some positives. Knowing she is dying has allowed her to be more aggressive with financial institutions that she had previously struggled with. "One day someone said to me, 'Just get your husband to do that,' and I had to say, 'Look, I'm dying of brain cancer and he's got dementia. You just need to sort it," she says. "I guess sometimes we need to be more assertive than we would otherwise want," she says, laughing. With that newfound assertiveness, Ms Bieber organised a visit from her children and grandchildren. The Fitzroy Police Station was called and told people were coming inside her home and why. "I didn't want my family to get fined for something they couldn't afford," she says. "They [the police] didn't quite say, 'Do whatever you like, love'  but that was the sentiment." On a cold day in April, she saw her family again and has been able to see them a few times since. "I just hold them. I just told them I love them," she says. "And I hold my daughter, and we tell stories about our life together and it is a celebration really. "It was like a filling up the soul again." While Kim Bieber can't move much, she says her children do it for her when they visit. "One of my grandchildren does flips and shows me," she says. "One of my grandchildren has just become a Cub, and I talk to her all about those things." "The other is very interested in football. God knows why, really. "They know I'm going to die, and they send me little messages in the morning, like: 'Guess what Grandma? I love you'. "It's sad. There is sadness, but there is a joy. A joy in being able to say goodbye.  "I have been very fortunate." Ms Bieber says there is a lesson for everyone now they have experienced their own lockdown and what it feels like. "We should be more sensitive to what goes on for people who are isolated or unwell, or elderly, or disabled in a way," she says. "That we can be kinder and more compassionate." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. 
Coronavirus Australia news: 6 million people have now downloaded the COVIDSafe tracing app, restrictions easing further in Victoria and NSW, as it happened
Chief Nursing and Midwifery Officer Alison McMillan says more than 6 million Australians have downloaded the Government's coronavirus contact tracing app. Meanwhile, Victoria and New South Wales are both easing restrictions further, with changes to come into place from next week. Look back on Sunday's events as they unfolded. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery Thanks for following along for another day of COVID-19-related news, everyone. The live blog will of course be back in the morning. And in the meantime, we'll keep adding the latest to our coronavirus update story overnight, so that's the article to read for the biggest developments as they happen. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery Chief Minister Michael Gunner said the Biosecurity Act  limiting travel to remote communities  would be removed almost two weeks ahead of schedule after consultation with land councils and traditional owners. For the full story, head here. By Yasmin Jeffery Clive Palmer will lodge documents with the High Court this week, arguing Western Australia's border closure is unconstitutional, as the state again recorded no new cases of COVID-19, AAP reports. Mr Palmer wanted to visit WA for meetings with businesspeople, Senator Mathias Cormann and potential 2021 state election candidates for his United Australia Party, but was rejected due to coronavirus restrictions. "Closing down the border is not only an act of stupidity by WA Premier Mark McGowan, but it is against the Australian constitution and I am confident the High Court will see it that way as well," Mr Palmer said in a statement on Sunday. "The WA premier needs to act now to ensure a successful future beyond COVID-19 by opening his borders to allow trade and travel from Australian states into WA. "It is a matter of national importance that the borders be open." Mr Palmer said he would lodge the legal documents on Monday and hoped to have a directions hearing in the High Court by the end of the week. Mr McGowan said on Friday that he endorsed the WA police commissioner's decision not to grant Mr Palmer an exemption from the travel ban. The premier has continued to insist WA's interstate borders will remain closed for months, despite criticism from some, including NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian. Audience comment by Agreed I agree with So Sad - where's the petition for journos to at least ask the CMOs how their day is going?  
Brazil is on track to become one of the countries hit worst by coronavirus. This is where they went wrong
The people of Paradise City, Sao Paulo's second biggest favela, are used to being ignored by government. The shanty-town ("Paraisopolis" in the local tongue) sprang up in the shadows of the luxury apartment complexes of nearby Morumbi, one of the city's most affluent suburbs. But its 100,000 residents have never had access to proper healthcare, education or sanitation. So, when the coronavirus started creeping through the tightly packed alleys, Gilson Rodrigues knew he had to take matters into his own hands. "It is a question of saving lives," he told ABC. Through crowdfunding and a few generous private donations, the community leader hired three private ambulances and eight medical professionals to cope with the looming emergency. "Things are getting serious," he said. "Many people don't exactly understand what is happening.  "People continue walking in the streets as if the virus hasn't arrived in our community, as if the virus was only affecting rich people who travelled outside the country." With thousands of residents now reportedly showing symptoms, there's little doubt the virus is here. The thousands of freshly dug graves in Sao Paolo's cemeteries paint a jarring picture of what comes next. Back in February, this was Julio Croda's worst-case scenario. As the Health Ministry's chief infectious disease advisor, it was his job to coordinate Brazil's coronavirus response. He developed a detailed policy on social distancing which was fiercely rejected by the President, Jair Bolsonaro. Then he was forced to resign. "During this time, you had a fight between [Health] Minister Mandetta and President Bolsonaro about this recommendation  For this reason, I decided to leave the Government," Dr Croda told ABC. "[It was] very hard because I want to help. I want to support public health." Three weeks later, his former boss, health minister Luiz Henrique Mandetta, was fired. The minister who replaced him, Nelson Teich, resigned a month after that. "The COVID-19 pandemic has become a political issue. This is the problem," said Dr Croda. Populist President Jair Bolsonaro has earned the nickname "Trump of the Tropics" for his populist zeal and anti-science approach to government. Indeed, his approach to the pandemic has often echoed that of the US President. He downplayed COVID-19 for months, calling it "a little flu" that Brazilians were uniquely suited to overcome. He's touted the unproven and potentially dangerous anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine as effective protection against the virus, noting the US President was taking it preventatively. He demanded all but the elderly ignore the state governments' social isolation restrictions, even attending anti-lockdown protests in person to insist nothing was more important than the economy. When the President sacked his health minister in April, he said: "Mandetta's vision was that of health, of life. Mine is more than life, it includes the economy, jobs." One highly respected British medical journal, The Lancet, called Bolsonaro the "biggest threat" to public health in Brazil. In April, when the coronavirus death toll surpassed 5,000, the President told the press: "So what? I mourn, but what do you want me to do about it?" Now, more than 1,000 people are dying every day. Brazil is now the sixth country to register more than 20,000 deaths. And experts say the peak of the outbreak is still weeks away. Brazil's health system is not perfect. But it's not terrible either, especially when compared to other South American nations. Dr Croda, who now works at the Federal University of Mato Grosso do Sul, points to Brazil's successful containment of the Zika virus and HIV as evidence the country has the capacity to tackle public health crises. But in the case of coronavirus, he's witnessed first-hand a "perfect storm for bad outcomes". Social distancing wasn't adopted early enough, he says, and it's difficult to carry out effectively in the crowded favelas anyway. He points to the lack of testing capacity, even now, and the 80 cities that don't have any intensive care unit beds. "When you don't have ICU beds, the lethality associated with the disease increases too," he told ABC. That's already playing out. "The people [are dying] in front of the hospital without any support  They're dying on the street." Communities in the Amazon rainforest are particularly vulnerable. Dozens of Indigenous groups have been hit already. Health experts say the disease is spreading rapidly amongst the Indigenous populations there, including across the border to Peru and Colombia. Many hospitals are severely understaffed, under-resourced and far away from many isolated rainforest communities. Critical COVID-19 patients are being evacuated by plane to the only intensive care units in the vast region, but services are severely stretched. The Mayor of Manaus called what was happening to his people a "crime against humanity". "I fear genocide and I want to denounce this thing to the whole world. We have here a government that does not care about the lives of the Indians." Back in Paradise City, Gilson Rodrigues is coordinating a group of volunteers he calls "street presidents". Two "presidents" are assigned for every 50 coronavirus cases, taking care of sick families and encouraging them to stay home. Gilson has also organised food parcels for those in need and established two isolation shelters. He continues to spread the message about social distancing. "We need to show people why they need to stay home because if they end up in hospital, the respiratory machines won't be there to help them. And they will die." 
Has coronavirus killed our chance to stop climate change getting worse, or given us a opportunity to act?
Ian Dunlop worries about his grandchildren. He worries time is running out. "We run the risk within the next probably five to 10 years, that we may trigger irreversible tipping points in the climate system," he says. He used to be a fossil fuel industry executive. Now he advocates for action on climate change. Global warming of 1.5 degrees Celsius in the next 20 years or so is essentially baked in, according to the UN's climate body  and Ian fears it won't stop there. "Three degrees Celsius, the best national security experts in the world consider will be social chaos," he says. "You can already see that and what happened with our bushfires. You look at major events like that and the social fabric really starts to break down very quickly." But he's not without hope. We're currently living through a life-changing, economy-twisting event: a global pandemic. Ian sees our response to coronavirus as a dress rehearsal for a much bigger challenge. "The only way we can really address climate change now is by some form of emergency action," he says. "We've left it too late to move through what people have been calling a graduating transition." When we're on the other side of this emergency, will we have the ability and will to refocus on climate change? Can we rebuild a fragile economy while taking action? Or will coronavirus push the issue of climate change to the backburner? Kim Sinclair also worries about her children, but it's not climate change that's front of mind. "I worry more about how they're going to put food on the table. Will they have a roof over their heads? What opportunities do they have in front of them?" She lives in Moranbah in central Queensland  where the mines are everything. Most of the mines produce coking coal for export steel markets. Kim worked at one of them for eight years, her husband still does. For Kim and the people she knows, there's a lot of fear around climate change and just what "urgent action" would entail. "There's nothing for us to put any of our hopes on. And unfortunately, very rarely are we consulted in the process," she says. "It feels like our livelihoods, our control, our self-esteem, our everyday lives, that's being taken away from us. "There's no plan, there's no structure, there's no discussion. People are just left hopeless and scared and wondering what the future holds." More than a thousand kilometres south on the banks of the Hunter River sits another mining town, Singleton. Mayor Sue Moore's job includes planning for a future her town doesn't want to talk about. "Climate change is not being discussed here. Coal is very much still part of this area," she says. The science on climate change has long been settled, and it's unequivocal: the climate is changing and human emissions of greenhouse gases are to blame. But that hasn't convinced Sue, who doesn't believe humans are causing the climate to change any faster. "I haven't seen anything that demonstrates to me that it is. That's my personal feeling." Coal mining directly accounts for 23 per cent of Singleton's workforce. The area is the biggest source of coal royalties for the NSW Government's coffers. Sue doesn't think mining will end any time soon  some mines in the area have the approvals for another 20 years at least. But in local government in the Hunter, "diversification" and "transformation" are important topics. Along with other councils in the region, Singleton is looking at opportunities like wind and solar. "There's so much potential there and we need to be ready for those opportunities as they present," Sue says. "The [community] doesn't want to talk about leaving coal  and we're not anti-coal by any means. But we want to be prepared for when coal may not be here any longer, which might be 50 years out." The UN's climate body says in order to stop global warming at 1.5C, the world must reach net zero emissions by 2050  meaning any new emissions into the atmosphere are removed or offset. More than 70 countries around the world, every Australian state and territory, the Federal Opposition, and industry groups like the Business Council of Australia all support the target. ClimateWorks Australia, which was co-founded by Monash University, has researched how Australia could get there. Its plan would require: CEO Anna Skarbek says the next decade is make or break. "It's the decade that emissions not only need to turn around but need to halve worldwide, so that we can then halve emissions again the following decade and reach net zero the decade thereafter," she says. "If we don't do that, we will have emitted, cumulatively, too many emissions along the way. So that even if you did reach net zero emissions at some point in the future, we've already put too much into the atmosphere to make warming tip over those limits." Anna says so much of the technology needed to achieve the cut in emissions already exists. "We can in fact leapfrog to a zero emissions alternative for most technologies in most sectors," she says. She says one massive project shows how Australia could become a clean energy superpower. We've known about climate change for decades, but we've done relatively little in response. In this special four-part series, Richard Aedy finds out why. With a proposed size of 6,500 square kilometres, the Asian Renewable Energy Hub in WA's Pilbara region would be more than half the size of Greater Sydney. CWP Renewables' Alex Hewitt says through wind and solar it will generate 15 gigawatts of power, with the capacity to expand to 26 gigawatts. That, he says, would make it the largest power project in the world. "We're going to use the electricity to make hydrogen, which then is an energy source which can go into all sorts of end uses  from cars and trucks and hydrogen fuel cells to industry, agriculture, heating, shipping fuels." Alex says moving away from fossil fuels for power is just one step. "The other sectors  agriculture, industry, transport, buildings  are much harder to decarbonise, and that's where hydrogen comes into play," he says. "When you start crunching some of the numbers on how much green hydrogen  as a fuel would be needed to decarbonise these sectors, the world will need not one of these big projects, but hundreds." The consortium behind the estimated $40 billion project is about to break ground, after being given the green light by Western Australia's environmental watchdog. Alex is confident the hub will be exporting and supplying the Australian market by 2027. The Grattan Institute believes hydrogen is key to creating a new multi-billion dollar industry  manufacturing and exporting low emission or so-called "green" steel. In a new report it says the industry could create tens of thousands of jobs in areas currently reliant on coal like Central Queensland and the Hunter Valley, but argues a flagship project should be invested in now. Emma Heard heads the Investor Group on Climate Change  its institutional investor members collectively manage $2 trillion in funds. Like Alex, she says what's crucial isn't just investing in new opportunities, but getting companies that are already operating to "decarbonise". "We can't just switch off the economy we've got, we have to actually get the economy we've got to reduce emissions," she says. "So in between investing in whole new climate solutions and technologies or not investing in carbon intensive or high-risk technologies and industries, there's the bulk of the economy, which is everything we do every day." She says the finance industry  including banks, insurers and super funds  is a critical part of that. "I'm optimistic about what I'm seeing is actually happening across the sector," she says. "Is it enough? No. Is it fast enough? No. Is it hugely important and really influential? Yes." An hour's drive from Sue's town of Singleton is a business that's ticking some of the boxes of ClimateWorks' plan for reaching net-zero. Molycop makes steel balls that are used in mining equipment to grind down rock by tumbling it in what the company's Brett Allen likens to a giant steel can. Rather than making the balls from scratch, they're made from melting down local scrap steel. "From an environmental perspective, it's about a quarter of the carbon footprint of a traditional steel making method," Brett says. It's still an energy intensive process. Brett says the company's recently improved its environmental credentials by negotiating to ensure part of the power they buy is from wind and solar. He says sourcing power from renewables and making recycled steel product gives Molycop a commercial advantage over overseas suppliers, because Australian mines are interested in reducing their overall carbon footprint. "Offsetting just a little more than half of our electricity lowers our carbon footprint even further to one eighth of that of a traditional steel-making process. So that, we feel, gives us a competitive advantage," he says. The challenge of reaching net zero emissions was already an enormous one before the global pandemic. Australia is now tentatively emerging from months of coronavirus lockdown. Nearly 600,000 people lost their job last month, the government's shovelling tens of billions of dollars into its JobKeeper program to keep more than 800,000 businesses afloat, borders remain closed and a road back to a sense of normality for many is still not clear. Many other countries are yet to reach this point, or are doing so with the burden of death tolls many times higher than ours. Second or third waves of outbreaks could be around the corner. Grattan Institute program director Danielle Wood is concerned the crisis will push action on climate change to the backburner. "We're going to come out the other side in a much weaker position from an economic perspective, certainly from a government budget perspective," she says. "A slow-burn issue like climate change, as big and as important as it is, might look less pressing in the scheme of things. "A real concern  is that this issue just gets pushed further and further into the future, and we know that we need to act soon rather than later." ClimateWorks CEO Anna Skarbeck says while an economic downturn does make the task harder, the response to the pandemic offers opportunities. "Governments, banks, companies will be looking for how to stimulate the economy on the other side of this pandemic," she says. She says there are "shovel ready projects" and new technology ready to be invested in which will help reduce carbon. She says the JobKeeper program also shows how the government can support vulnerable people in a global crisis. "I'm encouraged by what we're seeing around this community response to the pandemic, that we could take the principles of that to support workers who are affected by the climate change crisis." Business Council of Australia chief executive Jennifer Westacott says for many people the main worry right now is their job. "But this issue won't go away because of this terrible crisis we're in," she says. "It's important that as we think about the economic recovery, we think make sure that the transition we have to make in our energy mix, our energy consumption, our energy supply, our use of renewables, our investment in new technologies, is front and centre in that debate. "Because it's the opportunity that I'm worried about that we're going to miss, particularly in regional communities." Emma Heard says while the challenges of climate change and coronavirus are very different, the common element is resilience. "Our communities [are] integrating and thinking about these issues into the decisions that we make every day, and actually looking ahead and planning for what we know is coming and looking at how we can best respond to it," she says. "Time frames are different but the size of the challenge and the kinds of responses that we need to be implementing are quite, unfortunately, quite similar." Ian Dunlop says any response can't just come from Australia. He sees two ways the impact of climate change will play out globally. "It will either result in countries moving into an extremely defensive position where they put up the barriers, you end up with 'Fortress Australia'," he says. "We all try and optimise our own personal possessions or national possessions which means we will probably not get on top of the problem. "We will spiral downwards into what will end up being global collapse. "The alternative is we recognise that this is a problem that the entire world has and we cooperate to unprecedented degrees to get on top of it. "If we do that I think we have a chance of handling it, provided we treat it as a genuine emergency." Get more stories that go beyond the news cycle with our weekly newsletter. 
Coronavirus has left Australian women anxious, overworked, insecure  and worse off than men again
Political leaders have found it hard to resist the temptation of characterising the COVID-19 pandemic in military terms. Donald Trump  eager to self-apply a Rooseveltian shimmer in advance of November's scheduled presidential election  designated himself "a wartime President". "We are at war," declared France's Emmanuel Macron. "In this fight, we can be in no doubt that each and every one of us is directly enlisted," announced the British Prime Minister and Churchill nut Boris Johnson, shortly before he joined  unforgettably  his own casualty list. And sure  the parallels are superficially there. An attack by a foreign and inscrutable enemy. An apprehension of shared peril that's prompted a partial abandonment of entrenched political positions. A sharp uptick in backyard gardening and the home preparation of stodgy or indigestible loaves. Check, check, check. Just like wars, the virus is more deadly to men in the short term. While men and women appear to be at equal risk of catching COVID-19, men are  according to gender and health tracking agency Global Health 50/50  consistently more likely to die. In Australia, men are 57 per cent of the dead. In Italy, they're 61 per cent. (Why this disparity? When it first emerged in China, the best guess was that it had to do with Chinese men being enormously more dedicated cigarette smokers. But with men still dying faster in countries with negligible difference in smoking rates, the range of proffered theories has retreated, via immunology and hormones, to a generalised "we just don't know".) Women  again, just like in the global conflicts of our shared generational memory  are doing the bulk of the clean-up at home. And while high hopes were entertained for the crisis to bring new hordes of home-based workers and thus a significant rearrangement of workloads within the home itself, early signs are that the gendered patterns remain all too familiar. Professor Lyn Craig, famous for her research into the gendered division of labour in the home, is currently conducting a study with University of Melbourne colleague Brendan Churchill of behaviour among families in COVID-19 lockdown. Provisional results from the 2000-odd responses received so far indicate that for households with children, social isolation and school closures have created an extra six hours every day spent on caring for or supervising them. Of those six hours, the survey's responses suggest that for heterosexual nuclear families, around four hours are being done by women, and two by their male partners. Housework, meanwhile, is up around an hour and 10 minutes every day for women, but less than half an hour for men. "Shoving everybody into the house makes more work, especially for women," says Professor Craig. There is a weary familiarity to the two-to-one division of these additional child care hours; two to one is roughly the division of domestic work that women have shouldered in Australia for generations. Professor Craig says from a researcher's point of view, the COVID-19 crisis was a chance to observe how men would behave once they were able to work flexibly or from home, free from the constraints that traditional workplaces may impose on men in caring roles. "So far, we're not seeing that if you take away the constraints on men from the workplace that it just suddenly becomes more equal," she says. "There's something going on, but it's not just the structure. They certainly are participating more, but it's not rewriting the gender relativities." Of course, as the Workplace Gender Equality Agency points out in its recent paper Gendered Impacts of Covid-19 the demands on single parents  most of whom are women  are even greater. "With schools closed and other childcare arrangements, such as assistance from family and friends, discouraged due to social distancing measures, single mothers will have less ability to work and are at greater risk of poverty." With so much changing so quickly, it's hard to track the serpentine implications of this vast escalation in domestic workload, and the asymmetric style in which it is divided. But the question of whether lockdown has been a blessed opportunity for quiet work and contemplation in the home office or a nerve-jangling exercise in multi-tasking at the kitchen table more or less necessitating a 5pm glass of wine does appear to be a gendered one. "The next person who tweets about how productive Isaac Newton was while working from home gets my three-year-old posted to them!" threatened Sam Giles, a Birmingham-based fish palaeontologist, in March, in a viral tweet accompanied by a photo of her home office, in which the toddler on offer romps adorably in what is left of a cardboard box. The deputy editor of the British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, meanwhile, Elizabeth Hannon, found herself swamped with spirited responses when she tweeted this observation: "Negligible submissions to the journal from women in the last month. Never seen anything like it." Columbia volcanologist Einat Lev responded: "I just received an email from a male colleague of my same rank and family status (young kids). Except he has a full time stay at home wife. His email read 'This is a strange time but at least now, away from teaching, I can focus on writing'. Sigh & Scream." This is the gradually emerging spinoff from the extra domestic load: what are women doing less of outside the home, in this time of doing more within it? "Writing papers" is one small part of the answer. "Running for public office" may be another. In October, Victoria will be the first state to attempt a round of local government elections in the COVID-19 recovery. There are 79 councils across Victoria and 648 elected councillors, of whom 240  38 per cent  are women. But Ruth McGowan, gender equality advocate in local government and author of the book Get Elected, reports that there has been a collapse in interest from female candidates. "We're heading for a precipice," she says. "A lot of women are looking at it and they're facing economic insecurity and more demands on their home lives. Not to mention worries about going out and campaigning where you can't go to public meetings, you can't stand outside supermarkets, you've got to be super savvy to run an online campaign. A lot of them are just going: Stuff it." Local government organisations have lobbied the State Government to defer the elections, but have been rebuffed. Thirteen councils presently have just one elected woman. "I reckon we are going to go back to having some with no women at all," is Ms McGowan's prediction. What else will women do less of during this period, as they bunker down to keep their families stable? No doubt, the picture will become clearer over time, like a Polaroid. But what is obvious right now is that COVID-19 is not like a war in one very important respect: it is destroying the employment of women. "World War II was a driver of female empowerment," says Bianca Hartge Hazelman, founder and editor of Financy, which tracks women's financial independence. "Women got a taste of money in their pocket and that really drove a great push towards financial independence and equality. "What we are having now is almost the reverse. I've been tracking the financial progress of women for many years, and this is the slowest start to a year since 2015." The social and economic commentator George Megalogenis has dubbed the COVID-19 contraction a "pink-collar recession", pointing out that unlike the 1990s recession in which men lost 85 per cent of the jobs, and the 1980s recession in which they lost 76 per cent of the jobs, more than half of the direct workforce victims so far in this event are female. COVID-19 and its attendant gang of unintended consequences have a number of bad news items for women. One: They are over-represented in the fields most affected by an economic shutdown. The hardest-hit sector, food and accommodation services, for instance, is a heavy employer of women and has shed a third of its workforce since March, according to the latest information available from the Australian Bureau of Statistics. The next worst hit is the arts, which has lost a quarter of its total jobs  again, more of them from women.  Two: Women are over-represented in casual employment, and thus more likely to both lose their jobs during the COVID-19 contraction and be ineligible for support under the Government's Job Keeper package. Bankwest Curtin Economic Centre researchers Rebecca Cassells and Alan Duncan crunched the numbers of casual workers employed for less than the 12 month benchmark required to receive JobKeeper. They report that in the food and accommodation sector, there are an estimated 92,600 men who are casuals of less than a year's tenure, but 117,600 women. And in the health care and social assistance sector, the disparity is astonishing; 89,100 women, compared to 17,700 men. Sometimes, the data on casual workers is hard to winnow out; in the university sector, for example, which has long been accused of casualising its workforce, job figures tend to be reported in terms of full-time equivalent positions, cloaking the actual number of precariously employed teachers and administrative staff. The National Tertiary Education Union has estimated that women are around 58 per cent of casual employees in Australian universities. This matches the general pattern of women occupying more junior and less well-paid jobs in the sector; while more women than men are employed at universities, for example, the number of men employed at senior lecturer level or above is 9002, compared with 4685 women (on 2018 figures). Universities are not eligible for the JobKeeper program, so significant ongoing job losses are expected in a sector suffering an extreme impact from the loss of international student fees. Opposition education spokeswomen Tanya Plibersek said 66 per cent of non-academic positions at Australian universities were held by women. "Universities are like small towns," she said. "There's hospitality, there's admin, there's the cafeteria and student services  when you look at, for example, 600 job losses at Central Queensland University in Rockhampton, they are not professors. There are a lot of middle-paid and low-paid workers there too." A third significant factor for women is that they are hugely dominant in the (often low-paid) fields which during this crisis have qualified as "essential services". More than 75 per cent of "health professionals"  which includes everyone from pharmacists to social workers to medical scientists, according to the Workplace Gender Equality Agency  are women. This group, like teachers, is more likely to be called upon to keep working through the crisis, often putting their own health at risk, while simultaneously obliged to shoulder the previously discussed increase in domestic work. How to summarise this fusillade of data erupting from this extraordinary period in our nation's history, and the world's? Perhaps like this: Women right now are more likely to lose work that is paid and also more likely to pick up work that is unpaid. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Perhaps unsurprisingly, in view of all this, women are feeling distinctly more anxious and stressed than men right now. The COVID-19 Monitor Australia, a research project conducted by Vox Pops Labs in partnership with the ABC, asked respondents in its more recent survey to describe their own state of mental health. More than a third of women  35 per cent  said they very frequently felt stressed in the past week. This was a significant escalation from reported stress levels before the outbreak, when only 17 per cent of women classified themselves as very frequently stressed. And stress levels among men were lower than women's in both cases  13 per cent pre-COVID, rising to 22 per cent now. According to the survey, women have also experienced a slump in optimism over the course of the pandemic. Pre-COVID, 65 per cent of women said they felt optimistic, but in the most recent survey that fell to 47 per cent. Men's rate of optimism fell too, but less markedly; from a pre-COVID level of 56 per cent down to 52 per cent. Anxious, overworked, insecure; it's not where Australian women hoped we'd be, going into this new decade. "I think it's not going to be a good year for progress," says Bianca Hartge Hazelman. "One thing we really need to do is understand the real extent to which women carry the burden of unpaid work and support the economy. If they weren't doing that, the country would be in a worse place than we are now. Maybe we need that national call out, that recognition, like we did in wartime; this time to support women, who are statistically taking the brunt of this." 
NT parks hibernate in coronavirus lockdown as tourists kept out of Australian landmarks
While floating in the middle of a croc-laden river might not be the scenario one associates with care-free serenity, it's bliss for tour guide Dennis Miller. Sitting on his boat in Kakadu's Yellow Water Billabong at sunrise, Dennis is at peace and wondering: could croc country be the safest place in the world right now? "Come to the Northern Territory, it's the safest place on earth, we've got everything for you, and we're just waiting," says Dennis, talking to the ABC from his boat. But while Kakadu National Park remains closed to the public until at least June 18 under coronavirus restrictions, and tourists remain locked out of the Northern Territory under strict border controls, Dennis says the lack of tourism means guides, and even the crocs, are getting lonely. "The crocodiles are smiling, the ducks are whistling, and they're waiting for the tourists to come," he says. "We'd love to have you here in this beautiful spot when it opens." At this time of year in Kakadu's serene wetlands, Dennis says up to seven cruises a day with groups from all over Australia and across the world would usually depart for the famous Yellow Water Cruise. "It's beautiful at all times of the day, but sunrise is special: with the sun coming up behind the escarpment, hitting the water and the colour," Dennis says. "The sunset, too, when you get the reflections on the trees there and the colour really comes out. "In the Northern Territory, the floodplain, the river system, all those ecosystems connected together [you see] on the cruise. It's the only place in the Territory that has all these environments; all the birds and the crocodiles all in one." But with no tourists to entertain, Dennis, one of the most popular guides on Kakadu's waterways, says he remains hard at work in the park. "There's lots to do getting the boats ready and the hotel ready for the tourists when they get here as well," he says. Stephen Mills, the tours manager at Kakadu Tourism, believes Kakadu will remain well-visited by tourists when border restrictions lift in the Territory. "When you have scenery like this, you can understand why the world wants to come to Kakadu," Stephen says. "[It's] one of the richest cultural areas in Australia. 65,000 years the Indigenous people have lived here continuously. "There are hundreds of crocs, millions of birds, wallabies, the fish life is incredible. It truly is one of the wonders of the world." Tess Atie, who runs cultural tours with NT Indigenous Tours at Litchfield National Park south of Darwin, says she is hard at work planning for tourists when the Territory's borders ultimately reopen. But for now, only Northern Territory residents can visit Litchfield  a place Tess grew up hunting for turtles and fishing for barramundi. "My family have lived here all our lives," she says. "We've been living and hunting through this area, coming here for generations. "I love sharing my Aboriginal cultural connection with our visitors when they come from interstate or around the world  I'm very lucky and fortunate to give them that cultural experience here in Litchfield." For tourism operators like Tess who rely on interstate and overseas travel, the current peak season between Easter and September in the NT will yield very little business. "For my businesses, it's had a great impact, it's been very hard  we're waiting for our borders to open. Once the borders open, we'll be ready," she says. "It's been a deep rollercoaster for our businesses  it's been very hard. But there's also a positive: it gives us time to create." While the Northern Territory Chief Minister has given no indication when the NT's borders could reopen, Tess is hopeful tourists from across the country could return in time for the tropical summer in October. "My favourite thing about the tropical summer in the Northern Territory, especially here in Litchfield, is that the spring-fed waterfalls are bursting and there's just so much water," Tess says. "That's when you get the very best of the wet season up here. "My message for all Australians is to come up to the NT [when it opens], because we do have a unique Aboriginal culture up here, we have beautiful waterfalls and a beautiful tropical summer." 
Mallacoota school to reopen after coronavirus pandemic and bushfires shut it down
There's a blackened spot near the top of the wooden power pole outside the Mallacoota fire station that serves as a constant reminder of the terrible ferocity of the town's black summer. The pole is just metres from the Mallacoota Fire Brigade shed. Five months after the sky turned black and red here, the local brigade captain, Rod Lewis, recalls looking out of his incident control room to see the "massive wall of flame" at their door. "It was pitch black, smoke, embers coming down by the tonne, thousands of embers," he remembers.  "It was coming down like a torrential rainstorm with red embers catching everything on fire." He estimates the fire was towering 30 metres into the sky. "Radiant heat somewhere up around 800 to 1,000 degrees Celsius. It was extremely hot," Mr Lewis said. "The ground was just erupting in flames." He said "fireballs" were flying across the area and one hit the power pole. Then the fire station itself was alight, forcing firefighters to turn their hoses on their own building. "That fire station had to survive for the recovery process and the management of the fire," Mr Lewis said. Mallacoota lost more than 100 homes in the blazes that raged in and around the town. But the fire station was saved. At the time, Rod Lewis's own family were among those inside.  As well as preserving human life, his priority was saving people's homes and protecting the local school, which is a few streets deeper into the community. He said the fire station was the last line of defence. "The centre of the town is behind us, [the] school, petrol stations, central business area. That had to be protected at all costs." He said the school was particularly important to save because getting students back there would be vital in the recovery. The fire ended up jumping the road and getting into the back of the school, but the damage was limited. The school has become an important focal point for the renewal of Mallacoota. Principal Tim Cashmore, known in the classroom as Mr C, is responsible for students ranging from five to 18 years old. He said many families with children at the school were affected by the fires and five lost everything. Three members of staff also lost their houses. "It's a long, grieving recovery process," he said.  "The volunteer firefighters literally saved our town. "One of our students was one of the firefighters, he's a very brave boy, doing his year 12." He said many other students put themselves forward to help others in a multitude of ways. Just when the children returned to school after the fires, hungry for companionship, the coronavirus pandemic sent most back into self-isolation. Mr Cashmore and his staff are now preparing for students to return on Tuesday, with a new world of coronavirus restrictions to navigate.  He anticipates the fires will hold some children back.  "There is evidence that kids will regress," he said.  "But we have also found that kids catch up really quickly when they are ready." One of the ceremonial duties that will be performed will be the handover of special mementos made by the junior students individually for each volunteer emergency worker who helped fight the Mallacoota fires. The lovingly crafted figurines made in each worker's image are lined up ready to be presented when school comes back. One has even been made for fire captain Rod Lewis, complete with a dusting of black ash.  "There won't be a dry eye in the house when they get handed over," Mr Cashmore said. 
Boris Johnson's top adviser Dominic Cummings travelled 400km during coronavirus lockdown
The British Government is facing accusations of hypocrisy after it was revealed that Prime Minister Boris Johnson's top adviser, Dominic Cummings, travelled more than 400km to his parents' house during a nationwide lockdown. Local media reported that Mr Cummings, who lives in London, was seen at his parents' property in north-east England at the end of March.  The UK's lockdown, which began March 23, stipulated that people should remain at their primary residence, leaving only for essential local errands and exercise, and not visit relatives. Anyone with symptoms was told to completely isolate themselves. Local police said that officers went to a house on March 31 and, "explained to the family the guidelines around self-isolation and reiterated the appropriate advice around essential travel."  The previous day, Downing Street had announced that Mr Cummings was self-isolating with symptoms of COVID-19. Mr Johnson's office said in a statement that Mr Cummings made the trip because his wife was showing coronavirus symptoms, he thought he was likely to also get sick, and relatives had offered to help look after the couple's young son. It said Mr Cummings stayed in a house "near to but separate from" his extended family. "Owing to his wife being infected with suspected coronavirus and the high likelihood that he would himself become unwell, it was essential for Dominic Cummings to ensure his young child could be properly cared for," a Downing Street spokesman said. "At no stage was he or his family spoken to by the police about this matter, as is being reported. His actions were in line with coronavirus guidelines. Mr Cummings believes he behaved reasonably and legally."  The local police force has since spoken and says it stands by its statement. The opposition Labour Party has called for an urgent inquiry into the matter. "The British people have made important and painful sacrifices to support the national effort, including being away from family in times of need," Rachel Reeves, Labour's cabinet office minister in waiting, wrote in a letter to the country's most senior civil servant Mark Sedwill. "It is therefore vital that the government can reassure the public that its most senior figures have been adhering to the same rules as everyone else." Speaking to reporters outside his home, Mr Cummings says he did "the right thing" in making the trip. He said to reporters: "Who cares about good looks. It's a question of doing the right thing. It's not about what you guys think." Transport Secretary Grant Shapps said Mr Cummings had the backing of Mr Johnson. "I can tell you that the PM provides Mr Cummings with his full support," he said. One of Mr Johnson's most senior ministers, Michael Gove, said of the situation: "Caring for your wife and child is not a crime." Mr Cummings was one of the architects of the Brexit campaign, and was later appointed Johnson's top aide. He is one of several senior UK officials who have been accused of flouting the lockdown rules that they advocated for the rest of the country. Epidemiologist Neil Ferguson stepped down as government scientific adviser earlier this month after a newspaper disclosed that his girlfriend had crossed London to stay with him during the lockdown. In April, Catherine Calderwood resigned as Scotland's chief medical officer after twice travelling from Edinburgh to her second home. When Mr Cummings was asked if he would consider his position, he told reporters: "Obviously not." ABC/ Wires 
Coronavirus breach sees NT Police issue warning to venue as owners say rules aren't working
A Darwin pub has been issued a warning by Northern Territory Police for failing to comply with coronavirus regulations on Friday night, while another voluntarily shut its doors after being "overwhelmed" by patrons. The incidents come as one Darwin venue says in-venue coronavirus safety measures are, at times, not working or proving difficult to manage. "The restrictions, I don't know how well thought out they were. We do our best to follow them and we encourage our patrons to follow them," said Matt Mulga, owner of Lola's Pergola in Cullen Bay. "A two-hour restriction, you're encouraging a pub crawl; you're encouraging patrons to go from this bar to that bar to that bar." Mr Mulga said he'd witnessed people leave his venue, go to a nearby restaurant and then come back in half an hour.  "I'm sure we'll look back at [restrictions easing rules] and say they were ill-conceived  and I'm sure the Government will admit that," Mr Mulga said. "If we don't have places like this open, instead we have [house] places where there's no control." Northern Territory pubs, bars and restaurants are open to the public under the proviso customers stay for a maximum of two hours and adhere to physical distancing, a 10-patron table limit is enforced, and that meals are served with alcohol. Morris D'Arrigo, the operations manager at Six Tanks Brew Co in the Darwin CBD, said constantly advising  people to follow the rules when they were drinking was a challenge. "It's a bit of education, coaching, training to let people know this is for their safety," Mr D'Arrigo said. "If it saves my grandmother and my kids, so be it. Let's follow it and I'm sure businesses look at it that way." NT Police Acting Commander Shaun Gill said the warning issued to the Darwin premises on Friday night was "in relation to service of alcohol without meals". Police said the other venue, which closed its doors, was not at fault and did "a very good job" after "a large crowd on very short notice" attended the premises. "The one that was really busy actually had a plan in place  [but] they were unable to deal with the public due to the number of people that arrived", Acting Commander Gill said. "To their credit, they actually closed their doors and no longer served because they couldn't abide by the COVID-19 restrictions." Police said rather than issue the venue with a warning, officers "offered some education" on how it could comply with operating regulations. Despite the two separate instances, Acting Commander Gill said "the public were fairly good and the numbers were fairly low" across the evening in Darwin. "This is just a timely reminder for all involved that the onus is on individuals as well as licensed premises that they have to adhere to restrictions," he said. Police did not disclose the name of either of the venues but said they may be named if problems persisted. No venues have received a fine for breaching coronavirus safety regulations since stage two restriction easing commenced in the Northern Territory on May 15. The fine for breach of coronavirus safety regulations for NT venues is $5,000. Acting Commander Gill said NT Police would continue to take a conciliatory approach with businesses and venues in the early phases of restriction easing before dishing out fines. "We want to give some education to start with and then we want to give [venues] some warning," he said. "To give them an opportunity to comply and then after that, if they continue to fail, then infringement notices will be issued." Police said it was imperative venues and patrons stuck to the 10-person-per-table limit and that 1.5-metre physical distancing was non-negotiable. "People need to be reminded that we're still coming out of a serious event. We're only in the [early] stages of going out of some severe restrictions," Acting Commander Gill said. "The ramifications are that we could end up where we were before." 
Coronavirus update: Tory MPs join calls for Dominic Cummings to resign, New York Times lists 1,000 Americans killed in COVID-19 pandemic
The British Prime Minister's chief adviser, Dominic Cummings, is refusing to quit over reports he broke coronavirus lockdown rules, despite several Conservative MPs adding to calls for his resignation.  Meanwhile, with the US death toll approaching 100,000, The New York Times has printed "just 1 per cent of the toll" on its front page. It came as people across the country got out of their houses for the unofficial start of summer. This story was regularly updated throughout Sunday. This story is no longer being updated. For the latest coronavirus news and updates, follow this story. Boris Johnson's chief adviser is refusing to quit over reports he broke coronavirus lockdown rules, despite several Conservative MPs now joining calls for his resignation. Dominic Cummings, who masterminded the 2016 Brexit campaign, travelled over 400 kilometres to his parents' house during a nationwide lockdown. His wife was showing COVID-19 symptoms at the time. The Prime Minister's office said Mr Cummings visited his parents to ensure his young son could be properly cared for, but the Opposition Labour Party said he flouted the Government's own advice. Mr Cummings told reporters he had no intention of stepping aside when asked if he was going to "consider [his] position". "Obviously not. Don't think so. You guys are probably about as right about that as you were about Brexit," he said. Conservative MPs Steve Baker, Simon Hoare and Damian Collins called for Mr Cummings' resignation on Sunday.  "It is intolerable that Boris' Government is losing so much political capital," Mr Baker wrote on Twitter.  "Dominic Cummings must go." Fellow Conservative MP Damian Collins said Mr Cummings "has a track record of believing that the rules don't apply to him and treating the scrutiny that should come to anyone in a position of authority with contempt". "The Government would be better without him," he said. On Sunday, Transport Minister Grant Shapps, speaking on BBC, said he would not resign. With the US coronavirus death toll expected to surpass 100,000 in the coming days, The New York Times dedicated its front page to 1,000 of those killed by the virus. Page one of its Sunday edition listed the names, ages and brief details of some of the virus victims with the headline, "US deaths near 100,000, an incalculable loss". "They were not simply names on a list. They were us," the front page read. "Numbers alone cannot possibly measure the impact of the coronavirus on America, whether it is the number of patients treated, jobs interrupted or lives cut short. "The 1,000 people here reflect just 1 per cent of the toll. None were mere numbers." The paper said it drew from 1,000 obituaries and death notices in hundreds of US newspapers to highlight the pandemic's individual human toll. The Victorian Government has announced a further easing of coronavirus restrictions, including the reopening of outdoor playgrounds and skate parks, from this Tuesday. On June 1, overnight stays at private residences and tourist accommodation will be allowed, and people will be allowed to have gatherings of 20 people in their homes. Public libraries, entertainment and cultural venues and zoos will also be reopened with numbers limited. The state recorded one further COVID-19 case on Saturday, while another case was reclassified as positive, bringing the total tally to 1,603. Authorities in NSW, where there has been just one new case of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, has announced beauty and tanning salons and nail bars will be allowed to reopen from June 1. Gyms will remain closed for now, however. NSW Health Minister Brad Hazzard said his office received frequent requests for salons to reopen over the past three months. "It hascertainly been a very earnest effortfrom a lot of people to make sure wecould open [the salons]," he said. Mr Hazzard advised those beauty business would need to have "a COVID-safe plan" before they reopened, and adhere to 1.5-metre social distancing. He said he was keen to get gyms open as soon as possible, but NSW Health was working with the gym industry on the safety elements involved in reopening. Millions of Muslims around the world are celebrating Eid-al-Fitr, which marks the end of the holy fasting month of Ramadan.  While Muslims are used to celebrating the holiday with large gatherings and congregational prayers, this year the annual holiday has been practised differently amid coronavirus restrictions. In the Middle East, Muslim faithful prayed outside closed gates leading to the Al Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem's Old City as the holy site remained closed amid coronavirus restrictions. In Malaysia, where more than 7,000 people are infected with coronavirus and 115 have died, many Muslim hospital workers spent the day at work. Muslims continued to congregate for Eid prayers on the streets in Indonesia despite government advice to worship at home. However, most worshippers followed the coronavirus guidelines by wearing masks and distancing themselves from each other during prayer. In Pakistan, Muslims held Eid prayers while maintaining social-distancing rules, in accordance with government rules.  More than 1,000 people joined public prayers at an open field in Karachi. Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi says any lawsuits brought against China over the COVID-19 have "zero factual basis in law or international precedence."  Mr Wang told reporters at a news conference on Sunday that China was a victim of the global pandemic alongside other countries and had reached out to assist other governments in need.  "To our regret, in addition to the raging of the new coronavirus, a political virus is also spreading in the US which is to take every chance to attack and discredit China," Mr Wang said. "Some US politicians, heedless of basic facts, have fabricated too many lies and plotted too many conspiracies." Raising such lawsuits "tramples on the international rule of law and abandons the human conscience. It's untrue, unjustifiable and illegal," Mr Wang said.  Those who would bring such litigation against China are "living in a daydream and will humiliate themselves". Many Americans have had their first big break from coronavirus shutdowns for Memorial Day weekend, flocking to beaches and outdoor areas for the unofficial start of the US summer. In Florida, surfside restaurant The Back Porch was packed despite operating at 50 per cent seating capacity to ensure chairs and umbrellas could be appropriately distanced. Newcomers had to wait for places to become free before they could enter. In Arizona, holiday travellers looking for access to some of the desert's canyons and other natural features caused a 24-kilometre traffic jam on the highway, according to the Arizona Department of Transportation. Some recreation areas, including the popular reservoir at Saguaro Lake, became so crowded that authorities had to shut them down. While the Memorial Day holiday that honours fallen members of the US military is on Monday, the weekend leading up to it marks the unofficial start of summer, with Americans traditionally flocking to beaches, gathering at backyard barbecues and unfurling picnic blankets in parks. Arlington National Cemetery, which holds veterans of US conflicts, remained open only to family pass holders who must have a face covering to enter. Access was granted to visit gravesites only, with no touring allowed. In rain-soaked New York, the epicentre of the US coronavirus crisis, Governor Andrew Cuomo discussed his decision to allow up to 10 people to attend ceremonies honouring military veterans, warning that social distancing and face masks should be part of any plans to get together. State beaches in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut were reopened, but rain kept most people away. Elsewhere, Mount Rushmore National Memorial in South Dakota welcomed visitors again on Saturday, earlier than expected. The Northern Territory Government has confirmed restrictions on travel within the NT will be lifted in less than a fortnight. Chief Minister Michael Gunner said the biosecurity zones  limiting travel to remote communities  will be removed almost two weeks ahead of schedule. It comes after land councils called for the travel restrictions to be lifted at the same time as other coronavirus restrictions are eased on June 5. The Government said the interstate travel restrictions would remain in place indefinitely. Prime Minister Scott Morrison has taken responsibility for a $60 billion JobKeeper miscalculation but dubbed an effort to demand answers from the Treasurer a political stunt. A Labor-led coronavirus parliamentary committee will seek to compel Treasurer Josh Frydenberg to explain how the Federal Government overestimated the JobKeeper wage subsidy program by $60 billion. "But what it means is Australians won't have to borrow as much money," Mr Morrison said.  Opposition Senate Leader Penny Wong said a COVID-19 committee examining Government measures in response to the coronavirus wanted to quiz the Treasurerabout the mistake. "The chair of the Senate Committee, Senator [Katy] Gallagher ... will call Josh Frydenberg to give evidence," she said. "What I would say to Josh: 'This is your opportunity to front up and explain $60 billion blunder to the Parliament and to the Australian people'." Meanwhile, the Government's COVIDSafe app has hit six million downloads, still below the 40 per cent rate cited by the Government as the minimum needed for the app to be effective. Clive Palmer says he will lodge documents with the High Court this week, arguing Western Australia's border closure is unconstitutional. The mining magnate wanted to visit WA for meetings with businesspeople, senator Mathias Cormann and potential 2021 state election candidates for his United Australia Party, but was rejected due to coronavirus restrictions. "Closing down the border is not only an act of stupidity by WA Premier Mark McGowan, but it is against the Australian constitution and I am confident the High Court will see it that way as well," Mr Palmer said in a statement on Sunday. Mr Palmer said he would lodge the legal documents on Monday and hoped to have a directions hearing in the High Court by the end of the week. Mr McGowan said on Friday he endorsed the WA Police Commissioner's decision not to grant Mr Palmer an exemption from the travel ban. The city of Wuhan, the original epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak in China, conducted 1,470,950 nucleic acid tests for the virus on Friday, the local health authority said. Some 1,000,729 tests had been completed the previous day. By comparison, as of Friday, Australia had conducted more than 1,192,262 tests since the outbreak began. Wuhan kicked off a campaign on May 14 to look for asymptomatic carriers  infected people who show no outward sign of illness  after confirming on May 9-10 its first cluster of COVID-19 infections since its lockdown was lifted on April 8. Authorities have said they aim to test all 11 million of the city's residents, an exercise likely to cost more than 1 billion yuan ($220 million). China on Saturday reported no new confirmed cases for the first time since it began announcing infections in January. Brazil has prohibited most foreigners from entering the country for another 30 days. The country is home to the second-highest number of confirmed coronavirus infections in the world after the United States. Commercial traffic is not affected by the measure and Brazilians and local residents will be allowed to enter. The decision was published in the official Gazette on Friday night, citing "health reasons". Brazil has reported more than 330,000 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and more than 21,000 deaths. Experts consider those numbers under counts because of the lack of widespread testing. US President Donald Trump went on his first golf outing since the coronavirus pandemic broke out, visiting his club in the Washington suburbs in a purposeful display of normalcy. Mr Trump's motorcade took him from the White House to Trump National Golf Club, and he was spotted wearing a white cap and white polo shirt. It was his first time at a golf property since March 8, when he visited his club in West Palm Beach, Florida. That was the same weekend when he met at his Mar-a-Lago retreat with Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro, whose press secretary later tested positive for the virus. Some White House staffers who had been in contact with the press aide went into quarantine afterward but none tested positive. Mr Trump is eager to promote the idea that the United States is returning to normal, although the death toll from the coronavirus outbreak continues to rise. Mr Trump's coronavirus task force coordinator, Deborah Birx, told a White House briefing on Friday that Americans over this Memorial Day weekend should "be outside, play golf, play tennis with marked balls, go to the beach  but stay six feet apart". The Department of Agriculture in Guam has invited hunters to participate in a pig-hunting derby to provide food for families in need during the coronavirus pandemic.  The two-day derby is scheduled to begin next Saturday, the Pacific Daily News reported.  The department released a statement saying the derby was intended to feed families, foster familial hunter development and reduce the feral pig population.  Event organisers are working with mayors to distribute pigs whole and unprocessed to residents within their villages and provide safe handling guidelines. A 107-year-old Iranian woman who was infected with coronavirus has recovered, Iran's semi-official Fars news agency has reported. The woman, Saltanat Akbari, was admitted to the Khansari hospital in the central city of Arak.  She was released from the hospital after spending "some time" in isolation. "She defeated the virus with the help of doctors and nurses at the hospital," the report said. Iran is one of the most affected countries in the Middle East, with 133,521 cases and 7,359 deaths.  Russia on Sunday reported 153 coronavirus deaths over the past 24 hours, the epidemic's highest daily toll, raising total fatalities to 3,541, the country's coronavirus crisis response centre said. It also said 8,599 new cases had been documented, fewer than on the previous day, pushing the nationwide tally of infections to 344,481. More than 40 people have tested positive for COVID-19 after attending a religious service in Germany. The service was held at a church in Frankfurt on May 10, after lockdown restrictions were eased. Church officials said they adhered to social-distancing rules, and had disinfected the building ahead of the service. Germany has recorded low numbers of coronavirus compared to much of Western Europe, allowing the country to ease restrictions over the past two weeks. Several thousand followers of Spain's far-right Vox party have gathered in Madrid and other cities to protest the Government's handling of the coronavirus outbreak. Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez announced that the country would reopen for international tourism from July, as the country emerges from one of Europe's strictest lockdowns. Its football league will be allowed to resume from June 8. Vox called for protesters to come in their cars and motorbikes to skirt the current prohibition on social gatherings in effect under a two-month long state of emergency. "Let your desire be heard for the resignation of the Government," Vox leader Santiago Abascal said from the open-top bus leading the cars inching down a Madrid boulevard. Vox called the protest the 'Caravan for Spain and Liberty'. Most cars were decked with Spanish flags and there were also small groups of people who participated on foot, with some not respecting the two-metre social distancing rules.  More protests were held in Barcelona, Sevilla and other provincial capitals. Over 28,000 Spaniards have been confirmed to have died from COVID-19. The lockdown successfully reduced the daily contagion rate of over 20 per cent at the height of the crisis to under 1 per cent for the past week. Hundreds of deaths from "coronavirus-like symptoms" have raised fears COVID-19 is rapidly spreading undetected throughout war-torn Yemen, where the United Nations and medical workers say the health care system "has in effect collapsed". According to official numbers, Yemen has confirmed 212 infections and 39 deaths, but with one of lowest rates of testing in the world, aid workers fear this figure is "just the tip of the iceberg". Medicins Sans Frontieres reported on Friday as many as 80 people were dying at home per day  up from a pre-outbreak norm of 10  in the city of Aden, where the international aid group run the only dedicated COVID-19 centre in southern Yemen. This week Jens Laerke, spokesman for the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, told a Geneva briefing that afterfive years of war and now a pandemic, "Yemen is really on the brink" and its health system "has in effect collapsed". Medical workers in southern Yemen told the ABC that some staff had been detained or threatened by authorities for sharing information about the outbreak on social media. Sources inside Yemen say there are no lockdown measures, curfews or social distancing in place. A new cluster of coronavirus infections has broken out in Malaysia at a detention centre for undocumented migrants, authorities have confirmed. Malaysia has this month arrested more than 2,000 foreigners for not having permits that allow them to be in the country following raids in areas under lockdown. The centres they are detained in are often crowded, with dozens of migrants packed in a single cell. The United Nations and rights groups have called on Malaysia to stop the crackdown and criticised authorities for going after a vulnerable community during the pandemic. The South-East Asian country has so far reported 7,185 virus infections and 115 deaths. The health ministry said on Saturday that 21 cases were identified at the Semenyih detention centre near the capital Kuala Lumpur, which houses around 1,600 detainees. It is the second detention centre at which a cluster of virus infections has broken out. Around 60 cases were reported among the 1,400 detainees at the Bukit Jalil centre earlier this week. In recent weeks, there has been public anger towards refugees and other foreigners, who have been accused of spreading disease, burdening the state and taking jobs as the economy plummets.  Rohingya refugees in particular have been targets of harassment and threats. Thailand has begun testing a vaccine against the coronavirus on monkeys after positive trials in mice, an official says. Thailand's Minister of Higher Education, Science, Research and Innovation, Suvit Maesincee, said researchers had moved testing of the vaccine to monkeys and hoped to have a "clearer outcome" of its effectiveness by September. "This project is for the human race, not just Thais," Dr Suvit told reporters on Saturday. The Prime Minister has outlined a policy that we must develop a vaccine and join the world community workforce on this." Thailand announced on Wednesday it was developing a vaccine  one of at least 100 potential vaccines in the works worldwide  and hoped to have it into production by next year. The vaccine candidate being tested by Bangkok's Chualongkorn University and two public sector partners harnesses messenger RNA technology, which unlike older types of vaccine does not contain any of the virus it seeks to attack. It instead uses part of the virus's genetic code to ultimately produce antibodies inside the human body. Thailand has several active COVID-19 vaccine-development projects, including separate cooperative efforts with China and the United States. ABC/Reuters/AP/AAP 
China reports no new daily coronavirus cases for first time since pandemic began
China has recorded no new confirmed COVID-19 cases on the mainland for the first time since the pandemic began in the central city of Wuhan late last year.  However, it had continued to see an influx of imported cases, mainly involving Chinese nationals returning from abroad The National Health Commission (NHC) said in a statement on Saturday (local time) there had been no daily rise in the number of cases compared to four new cases on the previous day.  It said, however, there were two new suspected cases: an imported one in Shanghai and locally transmitted case in the north-eastern province of Jilin. New asymptomatic cases of the coronavirus fell to 28 from 35 a day earlier, the NHC said. China had seen a sharp fall in locally transmitted cases since March as major restrictions on people movement helped it to take control of the epidemic in many parts of the country. However, it had continued to see an influx of imported cases, mainly involving Chinese nationals returning from abroad, while new clusters of infections in the north-eastern border provinces of Jilin and Heilongjiang have emerged in recent weeks. Wuhan also reported this month its first cluster of infections since a lockdown on the city ended on April 8, prompting authorities to warn that counter-epidemic measures could not be relaxed and to launch a campaign to test all of Wuhan's 11 million residents for COVID-19. There are still some restrictions in place for locals, as people with the virus are still being monitored and treated. China's Government had begun using hyper-vigilant measures to track and trap remaining cases. The first case of the virus was identified in China's Hubei province and believed to have originated from The Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market in Wuhan. While Wuhan China had been the epicentre of the outbreak for many months, South America has become a new epicentre of the COVID-19 pandemic with Brazil hardest-hit.  Cases are rising in some African countries that so far have a relatively low death toll, the World Health Organization (WHO) said. "The COVID-19 pandemic today reached a milestone in Africa, with more than 100,000 confirmed cases. The virus has now spread to every country in the continent since the first case was confirmed in the region 14 weeks ago," the WHO said in a statement, noting there were 3,100 confirmed deaths on the vast continent. Wuhan has a population of more than 11 million people, which is greater than New York City, where more than 10,000 people have died because of COVID-19. Many suspect China's official figures remain conservative, speculating there were more victims in the early weeks of the outbreak who died without being tested. On Saturday afternoon, the number of confirmed cases in the mainland stood at 82,971 and the death toll remained unchanged at 4,634.  Reuters/AP 
Error in JobKeeper coronavirus payment will provide both relief and grief for the Federal Treasurer
With Josh Frydenberg staring down the barrel of the biggest budget deficits in Australian history, getting a call on Thursday night from the Treasury Secretary saying he's found $60 billion down the back of the couch gives the man holding the nation's tattered chequebook a modicum of relief. It's a massive amount of coin and will give the books a considerable boost as the Government plots a course out of the coronavirus economic slump. But the bureaucratic bungle which revealed Treasury had over-forecast the impact of the Coalition's JobKeeper wage subsidy program also opens the Federal Government to demands it needs to be more generous. The original bill was to be $130 billion, and more than 6 million workers would be supported. It's now clear only $70 billion will be spent and 3.5 million employees given a financial leg up. On a more basic level, the Government's critics will use this episode as an example of general administrative incompetence, wondering how the alarm bells weren't ringing in Treasury and the ATO when businesses registering for JobKeeper were making mistakes in the form. That, and why no-one stopped to think the numbers should perhaps have been lower given Australia was not hit as hard by the virus as the Government had anticipated when it did its original calculations, will also need to be addressed. It's not like they simply forgot to carry the one. The ATO and Treasury believe it was 1,000 businesses that caused the error but no doubt the boffins behind the scenes are scrambling to check, and double-check, their maths to make sure their future forecasts are watertight. The departments have put the error down to the fact that they were busy shovelling millions to the people that actually were eligible, but whether that reasoning stacks up will no doubt be debated at length in the weeks and months to come. Putting aside (just for a moment) the administrative muck-up, the Federal Government will be hit with a refreshed campaign to expand which workers benefit from the support scheme. That issue has been bubbling away ever since JobKeeper was announced at the end of March, as the nation's businesses grappled with new coronavirus lockdown rules sending them to the wall. Casual workers, staff in the university sector and the nation's creatives left floundering by the shutdown of the arts industry are among those on the list of potential beneficiaries if the scheme was adjusted. Labor has been lobbying for those tweaks, even though the party backed JobKeeper through Parliament at the height of the crisis  Anthony Albanese not wanting to let "the perfect be the enemy of the good" at a time when the country was being hit by the twin health and fiscal threats posed by COVID-19. Given the Government had already planned on spending $60 billion more than is now needed, the argument will be that there's no point writing that spending off as a happy symptom of an economy not struggling as much as had been feared. In other words, Josh Frydenberg should just press on and spend, spend, spend. His Assistant Treasurer, Michael Sukkar, was the Government's frontman on Saturday when those questions were being thrown around and downplayed any suggestion JobKeeper could be opened up to more Australians. "The money, as I said, is borrowed money," he told Channel Seven. "It's not a pot of money, sitting there just waiting to be spent and waiting for the Government to decide how to spend it.  "The parameters of the scheme are broad." Mr Sukkar was grilled about eligibility for the scheme by the ABC's Raf Epstein on May 14, just a week ago. "You and I would perhaps be having a different conversation today if you said to me 'Michael, there are only 3 million employees who are covered, it's half what we expected?' In that case, I would be saying to you, 'yeah, look, there's more of a likelihood of wholesale changes'" A review of the program is due next month and the Government appears keen to manage community expectations ahead of that  using whatever the findings are to justify any changes into the future, rather than jumping at its newly found, slightly less debt-laden status.   
ACCC to investigate houseboat company 'refusing refunds' over coronavirus cancellations
The consumer watchdog is investigating a luxury houseboat company in northern Victoria after it refused to refund holidaymakers thousands of dollars for bookings lost to the COVID-19 outbreak. One would-be holidaymaker says he has been left $30,000 out of pocket Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) chair Rod Simms told ABC Statewide Drive about 20 people had complained they couldn't get their money back from Echuca Luxury Houseboats, even though the company had not provided the service because of coronavirus restrictions. Mr Simms described the company's behaviour as "appalling".  "The company should be treating its customers a lot more fairly than that," Mr Simms said. Insurance Broker Don McLardy said he paid almost $30,000 to use a houseboat over Easter but was unable to take the holiday because of travel restrictions. He said he was unable to get a response from Echuca Luxury Houseboats about his money. "We are quite happy to have a replacement trip next Easter or the Easter after that but we've had a lack of response and have pretty much been shut down from Echuca Houseboats," Mr McLardy said.  Gisborne local Suzette Hare said she spent $4,000 on a booking with the company but was told she was not entitled to a refund because she didn't have travel insurance.  "So there was no offer of a rebooking, which was what I was after," Ms Hare said. "No credit, no refund, no nothing." Queenslander Phil Beresford, said he was out of pocket $1,500 and was also told he needed travel insurance. He said he lodged a complaint with VCAT after the company refused to negotiate other options, like a voucher. "It's not their fault that this happened, and it's not our fault," Mr Beresford said. "But to say that we've got to take the full burden of it and that they were going to be fine, it just seems ludicrous and very unconscionable." Mr Simms said it was misleading to tell people they needed travel insurance to get a refund. "Most travel insurance won't cover this anyway. The bigger issue is what are the rights that these customers have," Mr Simms said. He said in most instances consumers did have a right to a refund. "The only times when you won't be entitled to that refund is when there are terms and conditions which specify another remedy, when the situation is outside the control of the company," he said. "(Then) they are entitled to a voucher that is actually usable." Mr Simms said the ACCC's priority in the investigation would be to get a fair deal for consumers. "We've dealt with literally dozens of companies, and we've got a lot of companies to change their policies and treat their customers fairly, so I'd like to think we've had a lot of success," Mr Simms said. He said there would be serious consequences if the company was found to have misled customers. "We can take them to court and the penalties can be up to $10 million," Mr Simms said. Ms Hare told ABC Statewide Drive that, since unhappy customers went public, the company had offered her a full voucher. "I am yet to make a decision about that," Ms Hare said. "This has been a very difficult situation that we have been in and it has not left me feeling very positive about a future booking with this business." Echuca Luxury Houseboats' owner Andrews McKenzie said the company was working in "good faith" to provide the best outcomes for customers. "We are in the process of drafting correspondence to our impacted customers, which will outline our offer of a voucher that they will be able to use over the next three years," Mr McKenzie said. 
A modern rebirth of the international food hall pushes Asian cuisine to new heights in Australia
Much like the neighbourhood milk bar, the international food hall was once a staple of suburban Australian life. After fading out of Australian life over the past two decades, the humble food court is now making a quiet comeback, offering authentic, cheap and culturally diverse dining experiences in a modern era of well-travelled taste buds and colourful Instagram foodie blogs. "I think people are going back to the food court now because the quality is getting better," Malaysian Chinese chef Vincent Lim said. "It's still cheap but it's good quality now. You hang around with your friends, you can have some beer." The food court boom began in Australia in the 1970s, with one of the first being the stand-alone Sun Markets in Perth's CBD. "You'd see the bain-maries sitting there with this slick layer of oil across the top," Suresh Rajan, head of WA's Ethnic Communities Council, recalled. "You'd go to the Chinese place for example, you'd have some curry there, you'd have sweet and sour, Mongolian lamb, fried rice and some noodles and you got a combination. "It was the most horrific things you could ever eat because you literally had everything piled on to one plate. But it was cheap. "It was a real novelty  everyone went to Sun Market because it was a place you could get a meal that gave you exposure to a different variety of cuisine." That messy buffet style was replicated across many suburban food courts, long before the concept was adopted by commercial shopping centres to include the standard array of fast-food restaurants. "We always described it as Anglicised Chinese food," Mr Rajan said. "It wasn't your traditional Chinese food, it was really designed for the Western palate. "It wasn't for the traditional Singaporean market, for example, because they'd make most of these dishes at home." Mr Rajan said as the travelling public's tastes become more refined, the overseas cuisines on offer in Australia became more sophisticated. "It just seemed that the run-of-the-mill restaurants were providing what had previously been only available at the fine dining restaurants," he said. "We Aussies really don't pay for service or the flashy accompaniments that go with a meal, we want a good tasting meal and a good price." Food blogger Mary Noonan said she believed the rise of food trucks and the explosion of "foodie" culture on social media had encouraged people to be more adventurous. "In the past, people used to only like to go out to places that served spaghetti bolognaise, or steak and mash, or fish and chips," she said. "People were only having food that they were comfortable with, or food they were having at home already. "I'm finding over time people are becoming more willing to explore." Ms Noonan said support for food courts was on the rise after years of public disdain. "We're finding that a lot of places are now doing tapas, shared plates and food courts cater for that," she said. "You can go there with everyone and everyone will find something that they're happy with. "I think there's no excuse anymore to not have good quality food, especially in WA where we've got fresh produce everywhere." Mr Rajan said families and students were behind the resurgence. "You're seeing more and more relationships between the various cultural groups," he said. "Particularly in families where you have intercultural marriages where someone has the traditional Anglo cuisines verses something that originated in India. "You've got a family of five or six people, each with different tastes. "I can go to the Malaysian place and have the fish head curry. The fish head curry would be something that no one else makes, but I'll have that there.  "I have it almost every time  but no one else in my family would eat that." Nestled deep in suburban Perth is Spencer Village Food Court, which is recognised as one of the city's the most authentic examples of a Singaporean or Malaysian hawkers market. Tiny kitchens serving traditional meals from South-East Asia and beyond are grouped around a no-frills dining hall that often reaches its capacity. It opened 30 years ago, initially to serve a high concentration of Chinese immigrants and international students in nearby suburbs, but has since built a reputation that reaches far beyond the local area. "Food courts like Spencer Village represent a familiar cultural experience to our multicultural society," said the centre's manager, Cameron Hopkins. "The food is authentic to their origin, as is the dining experience." Danny Hung has run his tiny Malaysian kitchen at Spencer Village for almost 20 years. He said families were brought together around cooking familiar to their roots. "All the Malaysian, Chinese, Indonesian, Singaporean, Thai  everyone  they come here, they have a lot of choice and they're looking for their own flavour, their own food," he said. "Lots of Asian families love to come here  one order there, one order there, the whole family will sit down with each other and enjoy a meal." Joppy Sai recently opened his Thai outlet at Spencer Village after operating a stall at a nearby market for 10 years. "If you think about Asian food hall, this is the first one they'd have to think of. It would have to be," he said. "When it's busy, there's no seats available, we can only do takeaway. "It's multicultural people, Australian, New Zealand, African or any Asian. People across the world come. "We all help each other out when somebody has an issue  maybe there's a leaking tap or something  everyone just comes and helps." Mr Lim said the Australian food courts that succeeded were the ones that created a buzzing atmosphere. "In [the hawkers food courts] in Malaysia and Singapore, you actually see the chef cooking your food right in front of you," he said. "You can talk to the chef, tell him more chilli or less. You're running around with your friends, there's hundreds and hundreds of people. It's a vibe. "You really taste something homemade, something like your grandma's cooking." Mr Lim said Spencer Village replicated that experience on a smaller scale. "Even though they're still cooking behind walls, you see [the chefs] walking around, talking, yelling, shouting to each other," he said. "There's definitely a real vibe there for a food court." But even the well established cultural dining hubs are not immune from the perceived threat of coronavirus. Like many Asian food restaurants across the nation, vendors at Spencer Village have reported seeing a drop-off in trade as fears about the outbreak spread. Mr Hopkins said the impact had been minimal at this stage. "Naturally there is some cause for concern, as this seems bigger than SARS, however at this stage customers have been consistent and resilient," he said. "Support for the food court has been widespread, not just limited to people from certain cultural backgrounds. "We hope it stays that way for everyone's sake." Mr Lim said he expected food courts to become even more diverse to reflect the melting pot of culture in modern Australia. "I believe in the next five years you will see a lot more different cuisines from China that weren't here start opening up and taking off," he said. "The last three or four years you've seen lots of Sichuan restaurants opening up, the hot pots. "You will see a lot more cuisines from the north." He said Asian cuisine would continue to grow as more imported ingredients were made available to the Australian market. "Even places run by Western chefs, they'll use a lot of Asian ingredients to make it like a fusion," he said. "It's not just fish and chips anymore. "Even the fish and chips they will put the miso batter or the miso mayo!" 
The Goop effect: why online pseudoscience is so seductive 
I'm a sceptical person most days, but I do have my weak moments. Last weekend, Gwyneth Paltrow found me in one of them. This article contains content that is not yet available here. Half way through an episode of the lifestyle guru's Netflix series which explored the Wim Hof breathing method, I was almost on board to have cold showers for the rest of my life.  Wim Hof is not the first person to extol the health benefits of freezing water  friends have told me the same, and if you believe the stereotype, Swedish people thrive off running from saunas to ice lakes. So perhaps my mind was primed to fall for this exact episode of Goop.  There are many reasons why we find pseudoscience persuasive, according to Dr Micah Goldwater, a cognitive scientist at the University of Sydney.  It is often simpler for us to add knowledge than subtract it, he said.  "It's actually much easier to add things to your mental model of how things work than to take things away."  There's also the 'illusory truth effect', where the more familiar something sounds, the more likely you are to believe it's true. In other words, because I've heard so many anecdotes about the power of cold water, when I hear an embellishment dressed up in scientific jargon, I may be more likely to endorse it.  As a journalist who reports on online misinformation, I've spent plenty of time in anti-vaccination Facebook groups or in internet forums that suggest herbal remedies protect against the coronavirus. In those groups, it's easy to observe the seductive nature of personal stories. A friend's nephew whose case of the measles was cured by tea tree oil is more engaging than a dozen dry public health announcements. We're biased to sometimes think narrative detail is linked to accuracy, when that's not always the case. Plenty of engaging, specific examples can capture your emotion and empathy, according to Amanda J. Barnier, a professor of cognitive science at Macquarie University. "Perhaps by identifying with the details, it rips you away from a critical evaluation of the evidence underlying it," she said. One study conducted by Dr Goldwater, which has so far been presented at a conference, attempted to understand the power of positive and negative anecdotes. Participants in the study were assessed on how stories about the impact of medical treatments on 'Jamie' (a fictional person) affected whether they would use the same treatment. Even though they were told that the treatment worked for most people, knowing one negative personal story  about Jamie's symptoms failing to improve  often made study participants report that they would not want to take that treatment. "When you are affected by an anecdote, what you are potentially doing is generalising from a single case to your life," he said. "But it's possible that it just made you feel icky [about the treatment]." It's easy to laugh off Goop's vagina candles, but the threat of medical misinformation shouldn't be taken so lightly, writes Olivia Willis. Humans like explanations that help them predict how the world works. We are constantly thinking about cause and effect. That can lead us to a bias called 'illusory causation', where we interpret a causal effect when there really isn't one. If you take herbal medication for a cold and then get better two days later, you might assume the medicine did the trick. "The bias people have is they don't think, 'wait, what would have happened if I didn't take that herbal medication?'," Dr Goldwater said. "Well, you probably would have gotten better in two days just the same." This is why scientific studies use randomised control trials that give half the test subjects the medicine and half none  to test that assumption. We are also susceptible to what's called the naturalness bias. Put simply, "natural stuff is good and artificial stuff is bad". "It's just this heuristic that helps you make a decision, a shortcut," Dr Goldwater said. There will always be scenarios where that rule does not hold true. This article contains content that is not yet available here. We like explanations and rules, but our problem is that we want them fast. "Critical thinking about information you're presented with often requires people to slow down and think about it carefully and weigh the evidence," Dr Barnier said. She recommends taking your time when dealing with health information, and considering its source. "Who's saying this? And where is the information coming from? And what is it based on?" Dr Goldwater said we must also be willing to interrogate our own beliefs and why we came to conclusions.  "If you are constantly sceptical of your own thinking, that is potentially the best way to vet yourself," he said. But this is a struggle, even if it's your life's work. "If anything, being a cognitive scientist just makes me question my own thinking," he said. "You can always, in retrospect, realise you fell prey to one of these biases, because these are biases that are so ingrained to how we think." 
WA Government reduces Serco services at Fiona Stanley Hospital in scaling back of privatisation
The WA Government will spend up to $93 million to bring 650 jobs back under state control, in a significant scaling back of privatisation of services at Fiona Stanley Hospital (FSH). The changes to the multi-billion-dollar deal with private provider Serco will see cleaning, catering, orderly and domestic assistant services brought back into the public sector over an 18-month transition. It follows the former Barnett government's decision to privatise non-clinical services at FSH in a 20-year deal with Serco. The McGowan Government said it was scaling back that deal at the first opportunity, with approximately 65 per cent of the Serco staff at FSH to be brought back into the public sector. Unions have celebrated the revised deal but the State Opposition has attacked the arrangement, labelling it the "most irresponsible time to make major changes to the health system" in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak. Premier Mark McGowan announced the new arrangement within minutes of confirming WA had its first suspected case of community transmission of coronavirus. The revised FSH deal will come at a significant cost, with a one-off transition bill of $12.9 million and ongoing costs of $8 million per year over the next decade. But Health Minister Roger Cook said the Government was meeting its pre-election commitment to bring privatised services back into public hands where possible. "We have been able to do this in an affordable way and one that ensures there will be a safe and smooth transition," he said. "What we are doing here is affordable because we have managed the state's finances." Mr Cook said the deal would benefit patients as well as staff. "We know that Western Australians like vital public servants to be in public hands," he said. "The contract itself interfered with seamless patient care. Other services currently provided by Serco will continue until 2027, with the option to extend to 2031. Serco Australia chief executive Mark Irwin said he was pleased much of the contract would continue, but dismissed suggestions it would improve patient care. "The services that we have delivered have been world-class services," he said. United Workers Union secretary Carolyn Smith said the deal was evidence privatisation did not work. "Orderlies could not touch patients and the contract was massively understaffed," she said. The Serco contract came under heavy criticism in its early days, with problems including surgical equipment that had not been properly sterilised and the payment of 200 staff to manage a hospital that had not yet admitted patients. An inquiry chaired by former under treasurer John Langoulant also revealed the $4.3 billion contract was signed without a stand-alone business case, casting doubt on whether the state was getting value for money. The deal also saw Serco paid more than $100 million to run the hospital in 2014, even though at that time it had no patients. 
Gold Valley Iron put into voluntary administration, leaving Kimberley contractors out of pocket
An iron ore company in Western Australia's East Kimberley has been put into voluntary administration only six months after restarting the mothballed Ridges mine, 165 kilometres south of Kununurra. At a meeting of creditors held on February 25, administrators from KordaMentha were appointed to Gold Valley Iron Ore (GVI), which was given the right to mine the Ridges iron ore deposit owned by Kimberly Metals Group in a deal last year.  It is understood work at Ridges stopped last week while administrators assessed the financial position of its operators from Gold Valley. KordaMentha partner Richard Tucker said early indications were that the company had racked up about $10 million of debt, and that local contractors had been left out of pocket. "Our role since our appointment has been focused on trying to find a solution to recommence operations, such that local businesses and the larger contract creditors could be supported [and] employees could go back to work," he said. "As part of that there's been a lot of good will from both the employees and the major contractors, and we were able to a get a non-binding term sheet where someone would provide several million dollars to recommence operations. "However, unfortunately, events superseded that and the right to mine was terminated by the owner of the mine; so the ability to continue to mine in the existing structure is now unlikely. "Gold Valley Iron has not yet been liquidated, it will be up to creditors to decide the future of that specific entity." Mr Tucker said Kimberley Metals Group owned the tenement, and that it would be up to it to decide on the future of the mine. KMG has been contacted for comment, but the ABC understands the company is making efforts to find a way to get the site back up and running in the coming weeks. It is yet another roadblock for the embattled Ridges iron ore project, which was put into care and maintenance in 2015 by KMG, laying off 220 workers following the mine's closure. The Chinese-owned group began operations in 2011 and also own the undeveloped, higher grade Matsu iron ore deposit 10km south of the Ridges mining operation. The company's chairman, ZhengZeng Du, is also Chair of Tangshan Ganglu Iron and Steel Co. Ltd, which is one of the largest privately-owned steel mills in China. KMG shipped 6.2 million tonnes of high-grade ore to China from the Wyndham Port until it closed its doors four years ago due to poor commodity prices. At the time it was a huge blow to the town, with several other big commodity projects also shutting up shop amidst a mining downturn in the region. East Kimberley Chamber of Commerce president Steve Sharpe said it was disappointing to see local business left out of pocket. "We're not sure of the details of exactly how many local contractors have been affected," he said. "We know there's been a lot of local business keen to support the start-up of the mine. Subscribe for the national headlines of the day. "The possibility that a project like Ridges starting up was bringing to the community, it was a bit of hope for people and it's just really unfortunate this has happened. "It's certainly a huge blow in a region where Argyle diamond mine is heading towards closure, and people are bracing themselves for that." Mr Sharpe said another big resources or infrastructure project was needed to give the region a boost. It has also been a volatile time for iron ore prices in recent weeks due to the coronavirus outbreak. After reaching five year highs last year exceeding $110 USD per tonne, iron ore is now trading at $89 US dollars per dry metric tonne. Mr Tucker said investigations were in their early stages, but several factors had led to the present situation. "It would appear as though it's a combination of the fact it's a relatively low-grade deposit [and] the costs associated with starting up an operation and insufficient working capital to do so," he said. It appeared there were other early signs of trouble for the project when a dispute emerged between Gold Valley and Elmore Limited, a minerals processing company previously trading as IndiOre. A memorandum of understanding was signed last year which proposed Elmore process ore mined by Gold Valley at Ridges on a contractual basis. According to Elmore's quarterly report released on September 30, the company had "secured the mobile processing equipment required" but said it had been "repeatedly held back from commencing the contract".  Elmore "continued to try and work with GVI to resolve the impasse", the report said. Only three months later, Elmore announced to the ASX on January 14 that the mineral processing agreement had been terminated. "The contract stipulates that Elmore will be paid $1 million plus compensation for lost earnings due to the contract being terminated by repudiation," the company said. The announcement also revealed that Gold Valley Iron had started civil action against Elmore over the payment of plant equipment sold to it from a project GVI had acquired called Frances Creek mine in the Northern Territory. By February 17, administrators had been called in from Hall Chadwick, and then replaced by KordaMentha at a creditors meeting later in the month. Since that time several contractors have contacted the ABC and said they have not been paid for their work since Ridges restarted last year. Gold Valley Iron is a Perth-based private explorer that is part of the Gold Valley Group chaired by Singaporean businessman Mr Yuzheng Xie. According to its website the group has interests in mining, agriculture and energy in WA, the Northern Territory and Queensland. ABC has not been able to get in touch with a representative from Gold Valley Iron. 
Clear of coronavirus for 40 days, plan to reopen the Kimberley takes shape
When  and how  will it be safe for the Kimberley to reopen? It's a question generating plenty of discussion right across the north of Western Australia at the moment, as statewide restrictions designed to halt the spread of COVID-19 begin to ease. Would-be travellers are keen to head north on what's often an annual migration to escape the winter chill. And cut off from the tourist traffic that can make or break their year, businesses across the Kimberley are keen to get them over the border. But with 17 recorded cases, almost all linked to outside travellers, the prospect of a resumption in visitors also carries a degree of concern within the community. While some politicians and business representatives have urged an immediate reopening, community leaders have set their sights on June 18 for the region's tough travel restrictions to be lifted in a 12-point plan, backed by local government, medical and Aboriginal representatives and submitted to the State Government. With the exception of three cases in Broome, the majority of the Kimberley's 17 COVID-19 cases have been linked to travel  particularly locals and critical workers returning from interstate and overseas. The threat of the virus prompted local leaders to call for a lockdown, resulting in a joint State-Federal biosecurity regime enforcing the toughest travel restrictions in WA. Travellers must quarantine outside the region for 14 days, while travel to (but not from) remote Aboriginal Communities is banned under the threat of fines of up to $50,000 and jail time. But with no new cases for more than 40 days, Kimberley Aboriginal Medical Services (KAMS) CEO Vicki O'Donnell said the argument for restrictions was shifting. "In three weeks' time, you'd have to question why we wouldn't lift border security," Ms O'Donnell said. "We have to think about what's going to happen for the next 12 months  because without a vaccine, we are still a high-risk area." KAMS backed the reopening plan, and argued the Government needed to adequately support Kimberley health services to contain any further outbreaks. Access to rapid, widespread testing across the region would also need to be solidified. Any further lockdowns, Ms O'Donnell said, should be strategic and targeted, with provisions to evacuate at-risk patients. "Maybe locking down a town, as opposed to the whole Kimberley," Ms O'Donnell said. "You can't rule out the prospect of community transmission in Perth, and they're going to be moving around. "We're going to get three times more tourists into the Kimberley than we ever had." An outbreak in a remote community remains a nightmare scenario for the Government, and a key factor in their cautious approach to the Kimberley. Health staff, bolstered by reinforcements from Perth at the height of the outbreak, have used the lull in cases to drill how such an outbreak would be handled. Outbreak management plans, detailing how any further cases would be dealt with community-by-community, are also being worked on. Kimberley Land Council acting chief executive Tyronne Garstone said the restrictions were the right step, but the time was right for them to be lifted. "I think the actions put down by the State Government and the Federal Government were right on the mark," Mr Garstone said. "And that's really played a pivotal role in us being able to keep COVID out of the Kimberley." While some communities had experienced positive results including reduced violence, alcohol and drug abuse, the return of large numbers of current and former residents had also posed significant challenges. Mr Garstone hoped governments would continue to pay close attention to the unique nature of the Kimberley and its remote communities when they began easing restrictions. He said it was imperative communities were given the choice to open back up or remain in lockdown. "They have to understand that each community has their own threshold in regards to removing some of the restrictions," Mr Garstone said. "They'll have to be approached individually and asked, 'Are you comfortable with removal of some of the restrictions?'" While the Government's lack of immediate support left many in the region disappointed, the unified plan may ultimately count in the Kimberley's favour. A unified push from community leaders played a key role in the Government bringing restrictions in and could be a similar factor in them being lifted. "It's always great when you hear a clearly articulated, unified message from the community," Health Minister Roger Cook said. "I'm really quite excited by it and keen to engage." While stopping short of committing to the June 18 date, he said the Government was already working to extricate the region from the "clumsy" Federal biosecurity arrangements that expire on that day. "I think we should, potentially, be more ambitious," Mr Cook said. But he said any shift would still be done on the basis of medical advice, and local medical services being equipped to target and deal with any further outbreak. "Every time we ease a restriction, we increase the risk, so we have to do these things very carefully," Mr Cook said. "But, we do understand there has been a lot of pain in the community." He said some form of restrictions would have to remain in place, due to the Kimberley's vulnerable population, and remote communities would be consulted on how that would look. The prospect of an end to restrictions cannot come soon enough, with a June resumption in tourism allowing a disastrous season to be at least partially salvaged. A survey of local tourism operators released by Australia's North West Tourism this week indicated 26 per cent of respondents were anticipating, or had already recorded, losses of more than $300,000. But chief executive Natasha Mahar said the survey showed persistent interest in bookings for July onwards this year, right into 2021. "They're all wanting to come here and we need to try and let them come here," Ms Mahar said. "We can find a middle ground and make sure we look after our tourism operators and vulnerable communities at the same time." 
Amid coronavirus lockdowns, use of online domestic violence reporting tool spikes
When news of the coronavirus shutdowns began to break, Joan* says she felt sick. "He was going to be here 24/7, it was a nightmare," she told the ABC. Joan had been in an abusive relationship but felt she could access help when she needed. "He would go to work and there was time for myself," she said.  But the lockdown meant those moments of privacy were gone. She had been planning on leaving her partner. Now, that felt impossible.  "It is like being stuck, in the worst way possible. I felt hopeless. And then the beatings started," she said. Joan, whose name has been changed to protect her identity, ended up seeking help through an online chat function late one night. "Hopping on the phone and calling wasn't an option," she said.  In living rooms, hallways, bedrooms and kitchens across Australia, people have been increasingly using an online chat tool to seek help amid the COVID-19 lockdown. The national sexual assault, domestic and family violence counselling service 1800 RESPECT said between March and April, the use of its online chat tool had increased by 38 per cent. The organisation said the increase represented close to 1,000 people, with more than 4,000 people overall seeking help through its webchats in March and April. With attempts to rationalise the murder of Hannah Clarke and her children, we risk blaming the monster and not the man, Rowan Baxter, and the society that allowed these murders to unfold. The organisation said for online chats, March and April in 2020 had been the second-busiest two-month period in the organisation's history.  "Between April 2019 and April 2020, we have seen a 20 per cent rise in the use of the tool overall," a spokeswoman from 1800 RESPECT said. The national hotline said it had also seen a spike in phone calls, but mostly after midnight while partners were asleep.  "Counsellors are now taking more calls from people who at the time of contact are in the same house as someone who uses violence," the spokeswoman said. "More people are calling the service late at night, closer to midnight. This may be when the person using violence is asleep or the conversation cannot be overheard." People were getting in contact for three primary reasons: experiencing violence while in isolation, being more fearful due to being in isolation with a violent partner, and concerns that escape was no longer an option. The spokeswoman said callers would often arrange for a special code word to be used if the caller felt they were at very high risk and needed police called to their home. Susan Crane runs Dawn House, a frontline domestic violence shelter in Darwin.  Unlike the national hotline, she said calls "dropped off a cliff" when the lockdown began. "There are many deaths where unfortunately we don't come across the names of the individual," says a researcher into violence against women. "It was absolutely eerie, we were expecting to be run off our feet," she said. "Usually the phone rings off the hook, then we were getting one or two calls a day, sometimes none. "It's really disturbing; it isn't as if domestic violence has stopped overnight in the NT." According to the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, it is estimated that in Australia 2.2 million adults have experienced physical or sexual violence by a current or previous partner since the age of 15. "What we were hearing during the lockdown was abusive partners controlling women 24 hours a day, including their phone calls," Ms Crane said.  In the meantime, Joan is worried about others still in need of help. "We can't be forgotten at this tough time," she said. "I feel for all of those women who haven't been able to get help yet, I feel like one of the lucky ones." *not her real name. 
Should Australian states ditch coronavirus border restrictions? Even medical experts can't agree on that
Two of the doctors advising the Australian Government on its coronavirus response have said they cannot see the medical reasons for some states keeping their borders closed. Yet these very states and territories  the Northern Territory, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania and Western Australia  insist they are staying shut because of medical advice. Why are there such different opinions? Australia has some of the strongest coronavirus border controls in the world, which are credited as a key reason for our success in suppressing the spread of the virus. The Australian Government closed its international borders to non-citizens and non-residents on March 20, on the advice of its medical expert committee. This body  officially called the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC)  includes all the state chief health officers and is chaired by Australia's chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy. "We knew that the greatest risk to uncontrolled transmission was in imported cases," Professor Murphy told a Senate inquiry last month. "As an island, we were in a position of perhaps doing border measures more effectively than other countries, so the unanimous health advice of the Health Protection Principal Committee was that we should do that." While the AHPPC has advised the Government on issues ranging from elective surgery to when elite sport should be resumed, it has not made any recommendations around state borders. It left this to the states, which acted quickly after Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced he was shutting Australian borders. Tasmania was the first state to close its borders, on March 20, followed by the Northern Territory, South Australia and Western Australia on March 24 and Queensland, the day after. The ACT, NSW and Victoria chose not to. Deputy chief medical officer Paul Kelly said the committee had decided "not to have a decision on [state] borders". "As has been the case with much of the national advice, specific issues related to states are to be done at that state level," he said earlier this week. New South Wales, with its tourism-dependent economy, has been calling for the opening of all state borders to help stimulate struggling local businesses. But the closed-off states  particularly Queensland and WA  have strongly resisted, saying they will open up when their medical advisors say it is safe to do so. Confusingly, two of the Australian Government's top medical advisors have indicated that they do not think it is a problem, medically speaking, for state borders to be open. "From a medical point of view, I can't see why the borders are still closed but, as I said, that's for the states and territories themselves to decide when that time is right for them," Professor Kelly said. His words were echoed by fellow deputy medical officer Nick Coatsworth. "I think it is not clear what medical reasoning [there] is for state borders to remain closed, but that of course is a matter for state premiers," he said. "I think the premiers of Queensland and Western Australia have made it very clear in the media that it is going to be their decision." Yesterday, Professor Kelly further explained why he did not think it was particularly risky to allow interstate travel. "With so few cases in the community  less than 600 active cases, with many people who have come from overseas and are currently in quarantine  the risk of opening borders or plane travel is very low," he told SevenWest Media. The closed states clearly believe they have made the right public health decision, with the statistics backing them up. The NT and SA are in the elite club of states with no confirmed cases of COVID-19, as is the ACT. Only NSW and Victoria recorded new cases of coronavirus on Friday, with both States experiencing community transmission. After intense media attention on the border issue this week, WA's Chief Health Officer, Andrew Robertson, took the step of releasing a statement to explain his advice. He argued that WA's decision to shut interstate and regional borders, as well as enforce a quarantine for interstate arrivals, was "highly effective in reducing interstate cases and eliminating community spread". "COVID-19 cases fell from 35 cases reported on 24 March 2020 to 14 cases by 09 April 2020. Since 29 April, there have only been 3 new cases, all directly related to travellers." His Queensland counterpart, Jeannette Young, shared similar statistics with RN Breakfast on Friday, saying there had been no new cases acquired from interstate in the past 40 days. Both Dr Robertson and Dr Young said it would not be safe to re-open borders until community transmission was eliminated in NSW and Victoria. "It's local transmission where you do not know where that has come from. That's the concern," Dr Young said. They both said their condition for reopening is for these states to record 28 days  or two virus incubation periods of 14 days  without community transmission. "Until community spread is eliminated in the affected jurisdictions, which will require at least a month to confirm, opening of the interstate borders is not recommended," Dr Robertson said in his statement. "If the community spread is controlled, relaxation of the interstate borders could be considered after the introduction and assessment of the impact of phase four [interstate border closure]." The closed states also appeared wary of re-opening the borders too soon and then facing the prospect of reintroducing shutdowns if there was a fresh wave of infections. Even as her state marked the significant achievement of having no active cases of coronavirus, South Australia's Chief Public Health Officer, Nicola Spurrier, refused to use the label "coronavirus-free". "This is obviously a really fantastic milestone for us   [but] it's no time to be complacent," she said. "We do not want a second wave. If we did have a second wave, the only way people know how to deal with that is to shut things down." 
Coronavirus has cancelled major events and it may be a while before we are ready to return to crowds
Football without crowds, stadiums without concerts and festivals on the chopping block  COVID-19 has ushered in an uncertain new era for major public events. As restrictions ease and we make our way back to pubs, restaurants and public spaces, there are still many factors at play before we get back to our regular calendar of big events. One of the biggest hurdles to getting back in a crowd could be psychological. With constant reinforcement about physical distancing and staying in your 'bubble', have you found yourself briefly taken aback seeing people in crowds or close together in old photos or in TV shows? University of Queensland social psychology Professor Jolanda Jetten has experienced this and said it was an example of how rapidly we have accepted a new world of restrictions. "It tells you how quickly we've adapted our behaviours, how quickly we've seen closeness to others as something that's dangerous," she said. Professor Jetten said it would take some adjustment for people to return to big events. "The whole idea now of avoiding a crowd has almost become second nature," she said. "We've developed the habits of distancing and to overcome that habit, we're only willing to do that if we know it's 100 per cent safe." At the same time, Professor Jetten said she thought people had missed the feeling of belonging  and the sense of shared experience  that being in a crowd could foster. "I think people have been grieving to go back to normal, to go back to not just meetings with 10 other people, but also to be part of crowds and thousands of people that gather," she said. "We really are social animals, we love to be in a crowd, we love to be immersed  I really wonder how that will play out in the next couple of months." The logistics of planning an event long in advance are complex  and that's before you throw in the added uncertainty of what COVID-19 restrictions could look like. Hobart's Dark Mofo festival pulled the pin early on its 2020 event, saying a last-minute cancellation would have caused even more financial devastation. Perth's annual Australia Day Skyworks celebration, which draws hundreds of thousands of people on January 26 to the banks of the Swan River, was the subject of fierce debate earlier this week after the City of Perth announced it would consider not going ahead with the event, eight months out from the big day. Chair commissioner Andrew Hammond told ABC Radio Perth the commissioners had requested further reports on the event, which would be considered next month. "We simply don't know what the social distancing requirements are going to be at that time and I guess everybody can understand, if you've got 300,000 people sitting around the Swan River watching a fireworks show, there's going to be issues if there's social distancing requirements in place," he said. "If we let things go on as they are, we'll spend over $2 million for an event that might or might not go ahead." Kirsten Holmes, Curtin University's dean of research for the faculty of business and law, said the lead-in time for an event such as Skyworks was crucial. "The idea that we might not be able to get together in a big crowd come January is hard to envisage at the moment, because it seems like we've really got on top of the COVID situation," she said. "I can see why people are saying 'why on earth are they talking about cancelling it now, when it's so far out?' But they will be planning it  a decision has to be made." As AFL and NRL prepare players to get back on the field, University of Western Australia faculty of health and medical sciences executive dean Jon Watson said he was hopeful fans would be able to join them at stadiums later this year, provided there remained little to no community transmission of COVID-19. "Once we know there's no community transmission, the chance of someone going to an event that has the virus becomes very small," he said. "We know from the data on the virus that there's less risk from outdoor events than indoor events, so I think that something that happens in a big outdoor stadium would be more likely to go ahead than, for example, basketball indoors. "But we still need to think about physical distancing, we need to think about hygiene, there needs to be a robust cleaning schedule in place." Professor Watson said events without allocated seating  gatherings of crowds at festivals, or even golf, where spectators could walk around following competitors  would likely face a longer wait. "If someone's positive [for COVID-19], that's a different situation to someone going to a football game or a rugby game," he said. "I think [less controlled events] will probably be more difficult to police on a short-term basis. "In Australia we're going really well, but I think those more controlled events will come first." Australia's Chief Medical Officer, Brendan Murphy, has previously said distancing measures would likely stay in place until a vaccine could be found. With a vaccine still estimated to be a year away at best, some big gatherings look to be off the table in their usual form.  Major upcoming agricultural shows across Australia  including the Royal Melbourne and Adelaide shows, and Ekka in Brisbane  have been axed for 2020, with organisers of Perth's Royal Show cautiously looking on as September draws closer. Royal Agricultural Society of WA president Paul Carter told 6PR Radio a decision was likely from late May to late June. "As each day goes by, running the Royal Show in its traditional timeslot becomes less likely, even though we continue holding out slim hope," Mr Carter said. ABC health editor Norman Swan told triple j a return to music festivals should not be expected anytime soon, with Splendour in the Grass postponed from July to October. However, organisers are hopeful the Falls Festival will run as planned later in 2020. Professor Jetten said dense crowds brought the added problem of people underestimating risk. "At festivals, people engage in unsafe behaviours  sharing cups, unsafe sex behaviours, all sorts of things  because they see others as safe, 'we're all together, all good'," she said. "That's precisely what you should be concerned about with coronavirus." The experts agree a return to major events will look very different to anything we have seen before. Overseas, sporting codes that have emerged from behind closed doors have spaced out people in seats to ensure physical distancing. Professor Watson said he thought there would be changes in terms of queueing to get into big events, possible temperature screening and a need for stepped-up emergency care  along with spaced seating and asking people not to change seats to enable contact tracing. "We already have plans with medical services at major events, but I think there'll be an extra layer to that in terms of how we manage anyone if they suddenly become unwell and how they're taken from the event to a place of isolation in a hospital," he said. Beyond hygiene and health precautions, Professor Holmes said she could also see some environmental benefits on the way. "There's already a move within the sector towards not producing paper copies of anything  maybe doing away with wristbands, anything where people could be touching," she said. 
Animal rescue work hit hard by coronavirus restrictions
Thousands of animals are saved from regional pounds every year but that rescue work has been hindered by the coronavirus pandemic. Carey Edwards from the Australian Working Dog Rescue Initiative said the organisation's revenue has dropped by more than half. "There has been a huge impact on donations, of course, because everyone needs their money to survive," he said. Annual events where the organisation raised funds and awareness have all been scrapped. "We would have been out there demonstrating and showing everyone what our fantastic rescue dogs can do," Mr Edwards said. "That's all gone, as is all the royal shows we do  they're all cancelled," he said. The biggest problem has been getting to country pounds to save animals.  Codirector of the organisation, Di Edwards, said regular commercial transport options have been very limited. "So we've had to get volunteers to drive their own vehicles up to these pounds, which are thousands of kilometres away from anywhere central," she said. Ms Edwards worried that more dogs were being put down than might normally be saved. "We suspect more dogs are being killed in council pounds because of the impact that these restrictions are having on the operations of rescue organisations," she said.  However, there have been other rescue groups still managing to do regional pound runs. "We have contracts with various rural pounds throughout Victoria and New South Wales and we have transport runs that go up there regularly," Ms Edwards said.  Shortages of volunteers, along with social distancing restrictions, have made everything harder. "It is very difficult when you have animals involved and you've got to pass animals to other people," Ms Edwards said.  Shelters that normally allowed people to drop-in and see animals now required visitors to make appointments. At the same time, interest in adopting animals has been greater than ever because of the number of people working from home during the pandemic. "The phone just isn't stopping, we've never quite experienced it like this before," Ms Edwards said. "Once a puppy goes up on our social media page, within 15 minutes we're getting 100-plus phone calls." That has meant getting in first to adopt a pet has been harder than normal. And Pets Haven vet nurse, Jordan Ellard, said some people's frustrations have been spilling over. "I have had people abuse me and be rude just because they have tried to call several times" she said. "I do try to explain to them that I'm really busy I'm getting a lot of calls at the same time." The RSPCA has been experiencing the same challenges as other animal rescue organisations. But head of operations at RSPCA Victoria, Tegan McPherson, said the increase in demand to adopt pets has been welcome. "We're adopting more animals than we normally do at this time of year," she said.  "Animals that might have waited a bit longer to find the right home seem to be finding homes a lot more quickly." Ms McPherson's advice to people who were keen to adopt a companion animal was to be patient and be careful. "It's really important to do your homework and make sure the animal welfare organisation or rescue group is reputable," she said.  "Make sure that those animals have been health checked, come vaccinated, microchipped [and] desexed."  The last dog to be adopted from the Australian Working Dog Rescue Initiative was Harry, a fox-terrier-kelpie cross. His adoption was a foster fail, which occurred when a foster carer could not part with an animal when it came time for adoption. Only in this case it was Ms Edwards who could not bear to say goodbye to Harry. "Oh he just made us laugh," she said. "He's just so funny, so full of vim and vigour. He just does the funniest things." Harry was now one of a gang of seven dogs that Mr and Ms Edwards have not been able to part with over the years. All of which are now trained in herding and agility, and have been spending their lives showing the world just what abandoned working dogs could be capable of if given some love and a second chance. 
Coronavirus 'border wars' reignite old state rivalries that date back to Federation
Paul Keating once famously said: "If you don't live in Sydney, you're just camping out." Sydneysiders cheered while noses across the rest of the country were put firmly out of joint. It's one episode in a longstanding rivalry between Australia's states that flared again this week as various premiers traded blows over coronavirus border restrictions. WA Premier Mark McGowan fired the first salvo, evoking the Ruby Princess debacle in response to NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian's calls for Western Australia, Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania to open up their borders. "And they are trying to give us advice on our borders, seriously?" he quipped. It followed another jibe from Mr McGowan last month when he responded to questions about a NSW man fined $1,000 for contravening social-distancing restrictions by eating a kebab. "I find it hard to believe someone was going for a run and then stopped to have a kebab," he said between chuckles. "In any event, they do things differently in NSW." Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk also stuck in the boot, telling NSW it was "not going to be lectured to" by a state with the highest number of coronavirus cases.  Social commentator Jane Caro says the coronavirus pandemic has strengthened existing state rivalries, particularly against NSW. "NSW seems to always be the state that everybody hates in the same way that Manly Warringah is the football team everybody hates as well," she says. But she says the animosity is not without reason. "I think it's fair to say if the Ruby Princess wasn't allowed to disgorge everyone on Sydney Harbour and go off to the four corners of Australia we'd have had hardly any cases, so maybe NSW has a little bit of ground to make up," she says. Acrimony between the states is nothing new. It's seen each year as various sporting codes take the field, as states vie for the tourism dollars and the prestige that comes with hosting international events.  And it's a rivalry as old as Federation itself, when long-standing competition between Sydney and Melbourne resulted in the country's two largest cities vying to become home to the nation's capital. The Constitution had the final say: Parliament would be located within NSW but not within 160 kilometres of Sydney. Until it was built, Australian Parliament would meet in Melbourne. Greig Pickhaver, one half of comedy duo Roy and HG, says coronavirus has "broken Australian society down into states in a way that I never thought would happen again". "I'd love the State of Origin series to be on now because never before in say the last decade and a half has the animosity between NSW and QLD been wound up so far  it would be a magnificent spectacle for rugby league fans," he says. "Who knows? The Sheffield Shield may become the best cricket competition in the world at this rate!" Caro likens the rivalry to "a bit like siblings in a family" and says it's mostly light-hearted. "They might really love you but if they get an advantage over you they're sure as hell going to leverage it as much as possible and tease you about it unendingly. "I totally accept that there's probably a little bit of delight in being able to say to NSW, 'Ooh I don't know if you guys can be trusted,'" she says. "The more infuriating NSW finds that, the more satisfying that probably is for some of the other states." Having lived in three different states across Australia, Miah Tutuki-Crockett knows interstate rivalry when she sees it. "There's always been a bit of a thing between NSW and Queensland," the 25-year-old says, citing rugby league as the main source of tension. Ms Tutuki-Crockett, 25, grew up in Perth and later moved to Noosa on Queensland's Sunshine Coast but says Sydney has captured her heart. "It's a great place  there's always lots of events going on music, the food is amazing here, so I really like Sydney." Asked if any of her interstate friends rib her for moving to NSW, like a true Sydneysider she replies: "No I feel like most of them end up moving here at some point anyway." 
Coronavirus workplace rules create woolly problems for Tasmanian shearers 
New coronavirus workplace rules for shearers have created a backlog of unshorn sheep and could worsen a shortage of shearers in Tasmania. The new COVID-19 shearing operation protocols require shearers and other workers in shearing sheds to keep at least 1.5 metres away from each other as they work. To achieve this, shearing stands have been removed from sheds reducing the number of shearers working in each shed. "We've got a spare stand in between us, we've got to wait for the roustabouts to get the fleece before we walk in and get another sheep, and just make sure we stay away from each other," said veteran shearer Tony Bryant. Shearing contractor Ray Edwards said the number of other workers in each shed had also shrunk. "We normally have a wool presser and another shed hand, we've only got the one shed hand," he said. Sheds have been upgraded to allow for extra hygiene, and shearers are discouraged from travelling together and sharing rooms. Mr Edwards said following the new rules in sheds  often built at the turn of last century  was challenging but necessary for the health of workers. "I've got people that are older, some have got a bit of a heart condition, some have got a bit of asthma, and I've had a few health issues," he said. "I'm just trying to do the right thing by everyone, because I don't want the industry shut down." With fewer shearers working in each shed, fewer sheep can be shorn each day and shearing flocks takes longer. Mr Edwards said that had created a backlog of unshorn sheep as his crews and others spent longer at each property. "Instead of having a job cut out, I've got to wait, so the other farmers got to wait  it's just a snowball effect," he said. When Bothwell wool grower Will Bignell recently had 4,000 lambs shorn, only three shearers worked in the shed instead of the usual four. "It's 25 per cent less sheep, which adds up, it slows our whole system up. We lose efficiencies as well, that's the other thing," he said. Mr Bignell was unsure whether shearers would finish at other properties in time to shear his ewes before they gave birth to lambs in spring. "We'll have to basically look at lambing in wool which is not ideal and not the best animal health outcomes that we can achieve," he said. There was already a shortage of shearers in Tasmania when coronavirus struck. Shearers from the mainland have been deterred from travelling to Tasmania by the mandatory quarantine periods when they enter the state and, in some cases, when they return to the mainland. "If they come over from the mainland they've got to isolate here for 14 days, then when they go back they've got to isolate for 14 days," Mr Edwards said.  "They're going to lose 28 days, Just say they earned $300 a day and work that out. It's a lot of money." He fears the shortage will worsen as the season continues. The coronavirus work rules have also reduced training opportunities for new and aspiring shearers. A novice shearer and wool handler school is held every July at the historic Malahide property in Tasmania's Fingal Valley. Australian Wool Innovation trainer Matthew Haney said while the school usually catered for 20 students, this year the intake had been halved. "The 10 rooms that normally would be shared by two people will only be able to accommodate one student," he said. "Also in the shearing shed the 1.5-metre rule must be adhered to as much as practical, which would be impossible with a large group." The market price for wool has dropped as factories in China and other countries closed and retail customers stopped buying new clothes. Some wool growers are stockpiling fleeces until prices rise again while others are still selling at the reduced price. The coronavirus work restrictions also coincided with the breaking of a years' long drought in key sheep farming. Will Bignell had been forced to hand-feed his flock for two years as little rain fell. "It's taking its toll, your normal coping mechanisms are kind of gone," he said. "I think it's a good thing it rained. If it had been dry and we'd gone into this, it would have been soul-destroying." But he said the industry would overcome the new challenge. "That's typical of agriculture, we're a resilient bunch, we take a knock and we get back up and keep going," he said. 
Elvis biopic to resume filming in Queensland post coronavirus, Screen Queensland says
Elvis has not left the building  that's the message from film industry insiders who say the team behind Baz Luhrmann's biopic is "very committed" to restart filming in Queensland post coronavirus. Production of the film at Village Roadshow Studios on the Gold Coast was among the first casualties of the industry in Australia after Tom Hanks, who plays Elvis's manager Colonel Tom Parker, tested positive in March. Screen Queensland chief executive Kylie Munnich has been in contact with the film's production team and told the ABC as soon as restrictions have been lifted they planned to pick up where they left off.  "I know that they just closed the doors on stages and have stored the sets because they are absolutely committed to restart that film," she said. "They had done so much work in pre-production. "It's definitely their intention to get back into production here and they loved being in Queensland  they told me that many times. "I know they want to get back here and get started." Actor Michael Balk from the Actors and Entertainers Benevolent Fund Queensland said the impact of COVID-19 had left thousands of people in the film and television industry out of work. "Like Elvis in Queensland  there are around 1,500 people who are employed in a production like that," he said. "Obviously it effects everyone from the performers in front of the camera through to the crew, through to the people who are supplying to a film like that." Ms Munnich said two other major productions in Queensland  Harrow and Jonathan M. Shiff's Bureau of Magical Things  had also stopped work, as had several other smaller-scale productions.  "Just those three productions alone employed hundreds and hundreds of people," she said.  "There would be projects that were also getting ready to go into production where they've had to halt, so it's had a profound impact." The Media Entertainment and Arts Alliance (MEAA) said an estimated 4,500 film technicians, creators and performers remained out of work.  Michelle Rae from the MEAA said many had been looking for work in other industries while still paying off gear and equipment. She said she was worried the industry was at risk of losing decades of experience as people moved into other jobs out of necessity. "It is day by day for them. There are lots of conversations with banks and debt holders about being able to push that back," she said. Mr Balk said he shared those same concerns. "We're looking at a potential skills loss, where people that have been working for decades, if not longer, will suddenly be forced to change career," he said. Even though restrictions are easing, Mr Balk said the industry would still have challenges with social distancing. "Sound operators can't get close to the talent, performers can't have intimate scenes without breaking that 1.5-metre barrier," he said. Ms Munnich said some in the industry had been finding ways to produce work on a smaller scale. "Whether it's television commercials, film or TV [or] our games industry which is very robust in Queensland, you'll find people trying to come out from under this," she said.  Not all workers are eligible for government grants, given the nature of their role and the industry. Screen Queensland has launched several initiatives, including a $3.3 million support package aimed at allowing productions to keep working behind the scenes to prepare for the moment the "green light is given". "You can imagine that there will be a bottleneck ... in Queensland, Australia and internationally," Ms Munnich said.  "There'll be this real surge in production needing to happen." 
How NSW restaurants and pubs will be different from June 1 after coronavirus restrictions ease
NSW coronavirus social-distancing restrictions for restaurants will soon be the most relaxed in the country  bar the Northern Territory. But things will look very different inside pubs and eateries when hospitality venues in Australias worst-affected coronavirus state are allowed to open their doors to up to 50 people from June 1. Venues have been warned that people must stay 4-square metres from each other, and cannot stand, mingle or dance. There will also be no buffets or shared cutlery and bookings will be limited to 10 people. Diners will have to register their name and phone number when they enter the so they can be contacted in the event of an outbreak. The latest round of easing restrictions will come as a relief to many restaurateurs who have struggled to operate amid the 10-person limit. Aref Jaroud, the restaurateur behind a Facebook post which slammed a diner for cancelling without notice, said the industry was in a "world of pain". Mr Jaroud owns and operates Low 302 in Sydney's Surry Hills, and said when the mystery four-person booking, under the name Aimee, didn't show up, he vented. The post, told mystery diner Aimee there was "a special place in hell" for her for costing the restaurant 40 per cent of its capacity last Saturday evening. But now, Mr Jaroud realises "there could be many reasons why someone is a no-show". The viral post said Low 302 was now requiring deposits upon booking confirmations, but Mr Jaroud said he had changed his mind. As more patrons fill restaurants, bars and cafes from June 1, Mr Jaroud says "there is a health and safety concern that I think takes precedence". "I would worry that if someone for instance got the sniffles, they may decide to still go out so as not to lose their deposit. "I'm not putting a booking fee above the possibility of that scenario." He said he understands the frustration of the hospitality industry, but he said charging a booking fee was not the answer. "I'm one of them, but just now, more than ever, we need to place health and safety first," he said. "We may need to take a few no shows on the chin, and try to be patient." Mr Jaroud said he was contacted by dozens of restaurant owners, sharing their own tales of no-show bookings. "I cannot believe every one of them was due to an emergency, or a situation where someone in the group couldn't have picked up the phone, or emailed in a cancellation," he said. Mel Gatfield from United Workers Union NSW said regulations should urgently be put in place to protect workers and customers from coronavirus as the 50-person limit rolls out. "COVID-19 has devastated the hospitality workforce," she said.  "Now, as restrictions are loosened this workforce is apprehensive, members are very concerned about returning to work in confined spaces."  Mr Gatfield said the hospitality industry as a whole had an "appalling track record when it came to looking after workers".  "Hospitality workers must be able to go back to work in hospitality venues from 1 June knowing that strict measures are in place to ensure everyone's safety," she said. 
Our relationships are laid bare in coronavirus lockdown
Crouched in the back of the cab I have a choice: open the ABC News app and immediately inform myself of all the news I will need to know and broadcast that day or  in that gloom before dawn, and in those few moments I have to myself before the serious business of the day overwhelms me  do I open the Twitter account "Am I the Asshole"? This lockdown has revealed to us, and to those living with us, sometimes confronting truths about our deeper natures. People who had no intention of being so closely quartered have been thrown together by necessity and have spent more time, more intensely, with each other than maybe they ever have before. It's one way to cement a relationship. It's also one sure-fire way to burn the whole damn thing to the ground. This addictive, astonishing and sometimes quite unbelievable account (and there are many who think quite a deal of it is just made up) allows people to post to Reddit a personal dilemma about their behaviour which can then be discussed and voted on. The Twitter account @AITA curates some of the most intriguing. It turns out COVID-19 hasbroughtabout a global, real-time laboratory-condition series of psychologicalexperimentsthat are now being written up  not by Harvard professors, but byfreaked-out or deeplyguiltypartners in an all-access online forum. Journalism may be the first draft of history, but these posts are most certainly the key documents of a major sociological phenomenon. Some of the dilemmas are staggering. AITA for permanently deleting my girlfriend's Instagram account? For storming out of a dinner because they put potatoes in the chilli? For being mad that my boyfriend dedicated his book to OJ instead of me? For asking that my neighbour not bring her screaming baby outside? And in one of the greatest examples of narcissistic personality disorder you'll ever read, for taking my girlfriend's secret poetry that she doesn't want read and publishing it as a song? So many of the problems arise from two people suddenly living together. They bring their stuff  dolls, oversize soft toys, poetry, a total lack of maturity or empathy  and dump it all into the middle of a relationship that's just not ready for it. Or ready for anything at all. There are the man-babies, and the mean women and the selfish fathers, and punishing mothers. And while some of the posts are genuinely distressing cries from the heart  the wife who just wants her husband to get off the video games and look after their six-month-old  others are the primary material for what should become a modern treatise about a generation of people raised to be breathtakingly selfish. Yes, a lot of it is hilarious, but a great deal is also a fascinating insight into the biggest challenge that we all find ourselves in: where do my needs come right now? First or behind someone else's? Am I capable of re-ordering them? Check it out. Be as judgy as you like  that's what's it about  but then take a moment and ask yourself: are you one of them? Subscribe to join Virginia Trioli each Saturday morning for the best long reads, analysis and features from the ABC. This weekend we have evidence that some of us are trying very hard not to be that a-hole. Jack Gow is using COVID19 to getunapologetically closer to his male friendsand change the dynamic of his friendships for the better. My colleague Madeleine Morris is trying to do her bit toreduce her family's carbon footprint by cutting out meat(but you try telling that to a bunch of tofu-refusing kids). And we haveblack cockatoosfor you: the greatest bird in the Australian skies. No correspondence will be entered into on this. Thank you. Have a safe and happy weekend, whether by twos or 10s or 20s  and here's your weekly reminder THAT IT'S NOT OVER YET. Dear God, please keep your distance. Our over-talented but underemployed performers are doing what they do best for you this weekend  getting on with it, and the enduring treasure that is Belvoir has gathered cast from around the world to perform songs from many of their shows, sung by original cast members forBelvoir in Concert. If you tune in to watch, please donate just as you'd so love to buy a ticket and be there with them One of my secret loves, Virginia Gay  the woman who breathed life back into Calamity Jane in her show-stopping Australian performances  will be hosting this fabulous event. So wrap your arms around someone you love, tell them your heart's secret, andslow danceto this tonight. Virginia Trioli is presenter on Mornings onABC RadioMelbourne and the former co-host ofABCNews Breakfast. This article contains content that is not yet available here. 
Coronavirus Australia news: Cyber crime on the rise during coronavirus pandemic, United Nations warns, as it happened
The United Nations says the coronavirus crisis is moving the world towards increased technological innovation and online collaboration, increasing our vulnerability to cyberattacks  and it is estimated one such attack happens every 39 seconds. Look back on Saturday as it unfolded. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery Gladys Berejiklian may have told people to start booking their holidays a few days back, but we're still a way off from travel restrictions being lifted on June 1. For the time being, recreational intra-state travel is off limits. Deputy Premier John Barilaro said while regional NSW will welcome visitors with open arms when the time for travel does come, holidaymakers should call their planned accommodation venues and attractions to ensure they will be open and confirm their bookings before travelling. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery There's a headline I never thought I'd write. But here we are. Rent prices in Sydney have dipped to unprecedented levels and vacancies have soared amid the coronavirus pandemic. Inner Sydney currently has a 13.8 per cent rental vacancy rate, compared with 6.5 per cent last year, the latest data from SQM Research shows. Weekly rental prices in the CBD have also fallen by more than $100-a-week, compared with the same time last year. Here's the full story. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery Hi Brett, The Federal Government made a decision to ban Australians from travelling overseas on March 26 and there areno plans to lift that rule until at least the end of the year. There are exemptions to it, however, and the information on that can be foundhere. By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery University of the Sunshine Coast nursing program leader Matt Mason says the biggest difference between those countries and Australia is the level of risk. "The main difference is that we simply don't have the same burden of disease that America or the UK or some of the other countries have," he says. "The risk of catching the disease is much, much lower here because we simply don't have it circulating to the same extent that America has." By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery By Yasmin Jeffery 
Japan was feared to be the next US or Italy. Instead their coronavirus success is a puzzling 'mystery'
Crushingly crowded public transport. The world's oldest population. A huge outbreak on a cruise ship. A state of emergency without penalties.  It sounded like a recipe for a coronavirus catastrophe, and there were fears among public health experts that Japan could become the next Italy or New York.  But it hasn't happened. The country hasn't exactly escaped unscathed. About 800 people have died and more than 16,000 have been infected in a country of 126 million. But in comparison, more than 90,000 Americans have died from COVID-19.  And Germany, which is widely hailed for its coronavirus containment strategy, has suffered about 8,000 deaths in a country of 83 million people. The World Health Organization (WHO) sees Japan as a "success story" according to WHO senior adviser Nikki Shindo. "People are saying it's a Japanese miracle ... [they're saying], 'I don't really understand', because Japan received more than 400,000 tourists from China during Chinese New Year," Dr Shindo told the ABC. "Japan had cases much earlier than anybody else, but it kept the case count really low, considering its population density and movement of people." Japan was repeatedly criticised over a lack of testing, which some health experts said would hide the true picture of the virus' spread in the country.  But still, the number of deaths has not exploded, the state of emergency has been lifted in most of the nation and the Government says the country is on the path to containment. Pinpointing exactly why Japan has been able to keep deaths comparatively low has been a puzzle, according to Japan's Nobel laureate Tasuku Honjo. "We may expect another wave," the immunologist warned.  "But so far this is still a mystery to most of the medical scientists: why Japan, with such a relatively legally loose [state of emergency] system has quite remarkably [fewer] deaths and infections."  Professor Honjo said it would take some time to work out conclusively what was happening, but there are a range of theories currently being examined.  "People in this country are generally very clean. They like to be clean, they wash hands very frequently on normal days and they don't kiss, they don't hug," he said.  "There's also [a] hypothesis that the BCG vaccination will help with boosting up the basic level of immunity." The BCG is a tuberculosis vaccination which is not widely used in Australia, the US or UK. But it's still given to children in Japan. There is Australian-led research looking into the BCG vaccine as a possible protection against COVID-19, but research leader Professor Nigel Curtis said it would take "many months" before they would have any results. Kazuho Taguchi from Japan's Health Ministry said he couldn't "conclusively pinpoint" a reason for Japan's success, but the nation's strong health system and the fact many Japanese people wear masks may have helped.  "Japan has universal health coverage ... and we are proud of this healthcare system that is not behind any other nation," he said. Once the virus began to spread in big cities the Government was forced to declare a state of emergency on April 7.  But Japan's "lockdown lite" was nothing like the strict measures seen in other countries, and largely depended on people volunteering to stay home.  Restaurants were allowed to stay open for certain hours, and some businesses said they had no other choice but to keep trading because they felt the Government compensation on offer was inadequate The lockdown has since been lifted in 42 of 47 regions, and infections continue to fall in the capital, it could end in the greater Tokyo area as early as May 25.  One of the major differences between Japan and many other high-income nations is its philosophy on testing.  Rather than offer a COVID-19 test to everyone who wants one, Japan's regime has been far more "strategic" to prevent the overloading of hospitals, according to the WHO's Nikki Shindo. As of a few weeks ago, Japan was only doing about two tests for COVID-19 for every 1,000 people. Australia, by comparison, is doing more than 40 tests per 1,000 people. Kazuho Taguchi from Japan's Health Ministry said tests were performed this way so that people wouldn't flood testing centres, potentially triggering another wave of infection. Anyone who tested positive was swiftly isolated in hospital. But it has not all been deliberate. An initial lack of testing capacity and an overwhelming shortage of personal protective equipment for sample collectors and lab technicians also slowed the rate of tests.  But Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's expert advisers said that even as the number of tests increased, the number of positive cases continued to decline.  Despite criticism of Japan's comparatively low test rate, Dr Shindo said strategic testing was key to prevent the system from being overwhelmed. "Only one in five people are transmitting the [virus]. So you were just wasting the test to detect 80 per cent of the people who don't really create the second generation of infection," she said.  Dr Shindo believes criticism of the low testing rate is unfair.  "What Japan did was really fantastic, because if you test everyone, for what? It's not influenza. You don't have the disease-specific antiviral," Dr Shindo said.   Japan has since relaxed its guidelines for testing, and local governments have also been transferring people with mild symptoms to hotels, freeing up hospital capacity. Dr Shindo backs that strategy because it helps ensure positive cases don't travel to hospital unless absolutely necessary. "That movement will put other [parts of the] population at risk because those people will take a taxi [or] public transportation. They move," she said.  "I think it's wise not to do too many tests and really focus on the cluster detection and management of severe patients." But Professor Kenji Shibuya from the Institute for Population Health at King's College London remains concerned. With the country at times struggling to contain the virus over the last few months, he says they need to scale up capacity to prepare for a possible resurgence of cases. "Even if this wave is managed with some luck, Japan should not consider that it is a success. [It] needs to put the system in place ... to prepare for a resurgence, which will inevitably happen," he said. It's fair to say not all has been perfect in Japan.  There was the sudden and unprecedented crisis of the Diamond Princess cruise ship that was thrust upon Japan in February, and left 712 passengers and crew infected. Governments around the world  including Australia  organised charter flights to get their citizens off the ship docked at the port of Yokohama because of concerns about the quarantine. When passengers were let off the ship, it was initially feared that the virus would spread widely in Japan, but that didn't happen. And despite Japan's world class medical system, some medical facilities have struggled to cope with an influx of patients A surge of infections within some hospitals in the country forced them to suspend outpatient treatment and cut back on other services. An ambulance carrying a man with a fever and difficulty breathing was rejected by 80 clinics and forced to search for hours for a hospital in downtown Tokyo that would treat him. Some hospitals were refusing suspected coronavirus patients because they were not designated infection hospitals, did not have enough equipment, or feared the infection would spread inside the facility.  Emergency medicine experts said this put extraordinary pressure on critical care centres. But there are signs the hospital system is now stabilising in many parts. The Tokyo Metropolitan Government said as of May 19, there were fewer than 679 positive COVID-19 patients in hospital, and only 42 were in intensive care or on ventilators.  Professor Kenji Shibuya warns that there's no cause for celebration just yet. "Even though Japan did not impose a strict lockdown but a voluntary stay-at-home measure, people did follow it well and kept social distancing at the level of a strict lockdown in other countries," he said.  He also believes Japan got "lucky" that the virus was mostly contained to 13 regions. "We have to be really careful about the decision to lift the declaration [of a state of emergency]," he said. And while current figures show that the overall mortality rate in the capital Tokyo for the first three months of this year fell compared to the same time last year, Professor Shibuya is urging caution.  "There is a time lag between the onset and death, so we have to carefully look at mortality in April and May," the Professor warned.  Signs suggest the initial public health challenge may be under control.  The mission for Japan now is to both prepare for a second wave and start rebuilding the world's third largest economy, which has now entered a technical recession. 
UK to introduce mandatory 14-day coronavirus quarantine for all international travellers
The British Government has announced a mandatory 14-day coronavirus quarantine for all incoming travellers from overseas. The move, which does not come into force until June 8, has angered airlines who fear it will devastate the already frail industry. Under the rules, announced by Home Secretary Priti Patel, all international arrivals  including British citizens  will be required to self-isolate for 14 days and provide details of where they will be staying to the authorities. "Now we are past the peak of this virus, we must take steps to guard against imported cases triggering a resurgence of this deadly disease," Ms Patel said during the Downing Street daily press conference. "We are introducing these new measures now to keep the transmission rate down and prevent a devastating second wave. "Arrivals will be required to travel directly from their port or airport of arrival, preferably by car, to an address where they must then self-isolate for a fortnight." She said those who breached the quarantine in England could be fined 1,000 pounds (A$1,863), and that spot checks would be carried out by health and border officials. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Those whose accommodation does not allow for self-isolation will be set up in facilities provided by the government, but at a cost to the traveller. The quarantine measures will not apply to those arriving from the Republic of Ireland, and there are also exemptions for freight drivers, medical professionals and seasonal agricultural workers. Critics have questioned why the measures have been introduced so late, with Britain only enforcing quarantine on travellers coming from China and northern Italy at the start of the coronavirus pandemic. Airline bosses said the measures would have severe repercussions, with Michael O'Leary, chief executive of low-cost carrier Ryanair, saying they would be "unenforceable and unpoliceable" and would be ignored. "Introducing a quarantine at this stage makes no sense and will mean very limited international aviation at best," Tim Alderslade, chief executive of industry body Airlines UK, said. "It is just about the worst thing [the] government could do if their aim is to restart the economy." The Government said the quarantine measures will be reviewed every three weeks. ABC/wires 
NRL to proceed with single-referee system when play resumes after coronavirus break
The dispute between the NRL and the referees' union has been resolved, with the whistleblowers agreeing to the league's move to proceed with one referee for the remainder of the season. Under the deal, 22 full-time referees will be employed both this year and next with the one-referee system to be a "trial" that is reviewed at year's end. The referees' association, the Professional Rugby League Match Officials (PRLMO), had been planning to go before an arbitration hearing at the Fair Work Commission after a decision by the Australian Rugby League Commission to return to one on-field referee. But the union has now reached a deal to have a single official for the remainder of the year, and for part-time referees who are not required to retain a $500-a-week payment. The system will be reviewed at the end of the year by representatives of players, coaches, referees and the NRL management. ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys said the six-again rule for ruck penalties would also be introduced. "This is an excellent outcome for the game and all its stakeholders. Can I thank the individual referees for the way they conducted themselves during todays discussion," V'landys said on Friday. "It was heart-warming to see their desire that nothing stands in the way of the 28th May commencement of our great game and they want to be an integral part of its success. "The new rule changes will make our game faster and more entertaining. Most importantly it will address the biggest on-field issues which are speed around the ruck, and the eradication of the wrestle." The deal marked a win-win for the NRL after days of acrimony between the game's executives and the match officials.  The referees' union had infuriated the NRL on Friday by accusing it of overlooking player safety, saying administrators were "arrogant" and were like a "bull in a china shop" in rushing to make changes. "It's simple, today's game is safer with two refs," the PRLMO said in a statement. "On numerous occasions, the second referee has picked up potential causes of harm to players which were not detected at the same time by the other three match officials, nor the bunker. "This includes tackles, holds and throws that can cause significant injury. But this does not appear to concern the league's bosses." The union claimed that 80 per cent of ruck penalties are spotted by the pocket referee, who has been eliminated in the NRL's new model. Mr V'landys insisted that under his plan there would be extra qualified eyes on the ruck, with officials who had previously been pocket referees now acting as touch judges. Both they and the bunker will be given license to communicate with the central referee on the ruck as part of the changes approved by the commission. Mr V'landys said eliminating the pocket referee would save close to $2 million in a full season. ABC/AAP 
Two issues show how coronavirus has changed politics: industrial relations and energy 
It's amazing how a few employers putting 1500 into a form, instead of 1, can change the colour of your day, if you are a government feeling the weight on your shoulders of carrying the wages of 6 million workers at a cost of $130 billion. Those employers putting in how much each worker was expected to get from the Government's JobKeeper scheme, rather than how many of their workers were going to get it, had made the cost and employment fallout of the pandemic look even more terrible than it was. Until Friday that is, when someone noticed the problem and the number of people on the scheme was sliced by 2.5 million and its cost to "just" $70 billion. It's an immense relief of course, though no-one is suggesting it changes the underlying realities of the economic outlook with unemployment still forecast to reach 10 per cent. And it doesn't change the politics. If you were looking for some markers of how COVID-19 may have changed the way politics is conducted in Australia, two of our more fraught issues provided them this week: energy policy and industrial relations. What they seem to show is that pandemic produces a combination of some significant shifts around the edges, some urgent new pressures to actually address long-running sores, and quite a lot of "as you were" rhetoric and non-action. In the case of energy, there has been a flurry of activity, including the release of the King Review (the final report of the expert panel examining additional sources of low-cost abatement), leaked advice from the COVID commission advising the Government on an economic comeback, and the Morrison Government's Technology Investment Roadmap discussion paper "that will bring a strategic and system-wide view to future investments in low emissions technologies".  A pragmatic summing up of all the words involved would be "quite a lot about gas, not a lot about coal". Look, there were the usual hoary old chestnuts that rear their heads every time the Government has another attempt at re-booting the energy (and, dare one say, climate change) discussion: carbon capture and storage, soil carbon sequestration, nuclear power, blah, blah, blah. The Government has even re-discovered the potential joys of electric cars, after the whole unfortunate "Labor will steal your ute" diversion last year. Germany is doing what Australia says it can't  shutting down its coal industry. But what seems most significant is the lack of kowtowing to coal, beyond some talk of upgrading existing coal fired power stations. Some people might see this as either reasonable, or still too much coal. But to those watching the quivering contortions of the Coalition on coal, and all that talk about high efficiency, low emission coal plants just last year, the silence would seem to be deafening. So we have a significant, if relatively quietly made, change in rhetoric on coal, some greater urgency in thinking about affordable power generation for industry  given the sudden focus on the fact we may have to actually, like, make more things  and then quite a lot of what we have heard time and time again. This last bit, unsurprisingly, notes that renewable energy is already the cheapest form of energy and will remain so well into the future, though there needs to be a confidently-based transition fuel in the meantime. As analysts have pointed out, much of the roadmap bears a striking resemblance to a 2017 paper with a very similar name: the Low Emissions Technology Roadmap. The good news for those weary of the energy policy wheels spinning with little traction, but many acronyms, is that the subject is unlikely to get much air space, other than a general mention of gas, when the Prime Minister delivers an address at the National Press Club on Tuesday. Scott Morrison will be talking economic recovery and what will drive it, with a heavy emphasis on industrial relations. There are two aspects to the industrial relations debate at present that prove an interesting test of the COVID politics. The timing of one of them is completely outside the Government's control and goes to the heart of the issue exposed by the pandemic: the casualisation of the labour market. On Thursday, a full bench of the Federal Court made a ruling on the common understanding in law of what constitutes casual employment. Until now, it has been that casuals are those paid an extra 20 to 25 per cent loading in lieu of permanent employee entitlements. But now the Court has defined them by their pattern of work instead, finding that a worker, ostensibly a casual under his contract, but with regular and predictable shifts, is entitled to permanent employee benefits. Casual workers and microbusiness owners forced to isolate or to work less fear what could happen to them or their businesses, with no paid leave available to them. Depending on your perspective, this is a judgement that could either have economically catastrophic consequences, or will hardly affect anyone. It is certainly the case that it applies to a particular set of circumstances involving a labour hire company in the mining industry. And the judgement upholds another one made in a separate case two years involving the same labour hire firm, Workpac. Beyond that, some employers were arguing the retrospective decision could result in employees going back to "double dip" and claim backdated benefits for years of work and that it could apply broadly across sectors like hospitality and retail. Others, including the ACTU, insist that it should be seen clearly as a "loophole that labour hire companies have been exploiting to undermine job security and pay". For now, the Industrial Relations Minister is keeping his powder dry, awaiting indications of whether the case may be appealed in the High Court, but not ruling out legislation to try to clarify the matter. For it does raise inevitable questions about just what does constitute casual work in the broader workforce, at a time when the weak links of so many workers to their place of employees  as casuals  has cut such a conspicuous swathe through the economy and people's lives. The casualisation of the workforce  and insecure work  has been a big issue for the unions for some years but it is one that now has immense bite across the economy. What makes the Government's ultimate response to this issue is that it seems determined to maintain the spirit of cooperation with the unions that has built up through this crisis, a determination which has seen it this week officially put the contentious "ensuring integrity" bill  which would make it easier to deregister unions and union officials  in the freezer. That makes the question of how Morrison presents himself on the industrial relations issue next Tuesday all the more interesting. Both unions and employers have long expressed their dissatisfaction with the enterprise bargaining system set up by the Keating Government. What was once a system designed to help break industrial relations out of centralised wage fixing and allow for flexibility at the individual enterprise level has now itself become ossified. Unions argue it is not fit for purpose in an economy much changed over the past 25 years from large workplaces to small ones where the bargaining power of individual employees is much reduced. Employers argue that layers added to the system  such as the "better off overall test"  have made it unworkable. It's become easier for many to go back to the industrial award system which was supposed to gradually wither in significance and scale over time and so which also has its problems. The Government insists that it wants to step right away from the antagonistic politics of WorkChoices, and step back to allow employers and employees to work out how a new system should work. The Government's role, sources say, is just setting up the process for achieving that. The question therefore will be what mix of significant change, urgent new pressure, and "as you were" will emerge on Tuesday, and how it will drive the political battleground between now and the next election. Laura Tingle is 7.30's chief political correspondent. 
Bungle in coronavirus stimulus JobKeeper could be good in more than one way for the budget's bottom line
The JobKeeper bungle now means the Federal Government is essentially $60 billion richer, which is good news for the budget's bottom line. Economists say the savings should be used to taper off the payment for businesses who need it An error between the number of employees businesses estimated would be covered by the scheme and the actual amount currently receiving the payment forced the Australian Tax Office and Treasury to revise the total number, and cost, of the scheme down. The departments now say the scheme will cover 3.5 million workers, down from 6.5 million, and cost around $70 billion, down from $130 billion. Danielle Wood from the Grattan Institute said that, unsurprisingly, the difference in the amount will go towards softening the blow on the federal budget when it is handed down in October. "The Government has announced what we thought were around $195 billion in financial measures, $130 billion of which was the JobKeeper package," she said. "So, the $60 billion saving will mean the deficit is probably a bit smaller than we expected it to be." Ms Wood said if the revised number of employees accessing the scheme was an indication the economy was doing better than forecast, that could have other beneficial flow-on effects for the budget. "First of all tax receipts, obviously if we're not in such a big hole as we thought we were, that may mean that income taxes and company taxes are higher than a lot of us were expecting," she said. "It can also potentially mean lower spending on payments although, as we know, the unemployment rate has jumped up and we still have a lot of people on JobSeeker." But she also said it was important to note the difference between the estimated and actual figures could also be because businesses who had registered their interest in JobKeeper had not followed through. Economist and former Treasury official Warren Hogan said the error was significant and the savings were not entirely, as the Treasurer had claimed, "good news". "There isn't a sporting analogy for how big a miss this was," he said. "I'd be a little bit sceptical about painting a positive picture of this, I don't think that's right. "You've got a little bit more money than you thought you had, I don't think that means the economy is much better than you previously thought, although the Treasurer seems to think it is an indicator of that." Professor Hogan, who now works as an Industry Professor at the University of Technology's Business School, said it was "bad news" that the Treasurer had signalled none of the money would be redirected to other spending which would benefit the economy. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Both he and Ms Wood argued some of the unexpected windfall would be best spent on tapering out the JobKeeper program for businesses that were not back on their feet by September, when the scheme is currently due to finish. "They've got the flexibility to change the way the JobKeeper program finishes and that hard stop was always problematic," Professor Hogan said. He said there was going to be a lot of work for Treasury ahead in the fallout of the error, as they dealt with "a lot of moving parts" to adjust the budget and economic forecasts created on the original figures. On who was to blame, Professor Hogan said the error was one for Treasury, the ATO and the Government to learn from but it was "not a matter of blame". "This is all very new and when you rush things, especially at such a big scale, mistakes can be made," he said. "I don't know the mechanics and whether it was a silly error and someone should be held accountable within the ATO or Treasury. "We're in the biggest crisis anyone alive has seen from a society-wide point of view and we can't lay blame." 
Coronavirus update: Boris Johnson resisting calls to sack Dominic Cummings, South Korea records new cases as Seoul authorities close nightclubs
The British Government says Prime Minister Boris Johnson's adviser Dominic Cummings did not break coronavirus lockdown guidelines when he took a journey of 400km while he had COVID-19 symptoms, despite calls for him to face the sack. Elsewhere, South Korea has reported 23 fresh cases of coronavirus, mostly from the densely populated Seoul area where authorities shut down thousands of nightclubs, bars and karaoke rooms in a desperate attempt to stem transmissions. This story will be regularly updated throughout Saturday. This story is no longer being updated. For the latest coronavirus news and updates, follow this story. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson is resisting calls to sack his chief adviser, Dominic Cummings, after reports he broke the Government's own lockdown rules by travelling 400km while ill with COVID-19 symptoms. Mr Cummings, who masterminded the 2016 campaign to leave the European Union during the Brexit referendum, travelled to his parents' house in Durham in northern England in late March, when a strict lockdown was already in place. A lockdown that began March 23 stipulated that people should remain at their primary residence, leaving only for essential local errands and exercise, and not visit relatives. Anyone with symptoms was told to completely isolate themselves. Mr Johnson's office said in a statement that Cummings made the trip because his wife was showing coronavirus symptoms, he thought he was likely to also get sick, and relatives had offered to help look after the couple's young son. "Owing to his wife being infected with suspected coronavirus and the high likelihood that he would himself become unwell, it was essential for Dominic Cummings to ensure his young child could be properly cared for," a Downing Street spokesman said. "His actions were in line with coronavirus guidelines. Mr Cummings believes he behaved reasonably and legally."  The spokesperson said Mr Cummings stayed in a house "near to but separate from" his extended family. Dave Penman, the leader of civil servants union the FDA, said "the Prime Minister needs to understand how heartbreaking this lockdown has been for so many families and the sacrifices that have been made up and down the country." He said Mr Johnson must explain why "it looks like there is one rule for those at the centre of government and one rule for rest of the country." South Korea has reported 23 fresh cases of coronavirus, mostly from the densely populated Seoul area where authorities shut down thousands of nightclubs, bars and karaoke rooms in a desperate attempt to stem transmissions. The figures announced by the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention brought national totals to 11,165 cases and 266 deaths.  Thirteen of the new cases came from Gyeonggi province surrounding Seoul, which on Saturday ordered the closure of an additional 2,629 bars and karaoke rooms, bringing the number of shut entertainment venues to 8,363. But theres growing concern over the steady rise of infections in the greater capital area, where about half of South Korea's 51 million people live. More than 200 of the recent infections have been linked to clubgoers in the Seoul metropolitan area.  China recorded no new confirmed COVID-19 cases on the mainland for May 22, the first time it had seen no daily rise in the number of cases since the pandemic began in Wuhan late last year. China's National Health Commission (NHC) said in a statement that there were four new cases on the previous day, including an imported one in Shanghai and locally transmitted case in the north-eastern province of Jilin. China has seen a sharp fall in locally transmitted cases since March as major restrictions on people's movement helped it take control of the epidemic in many parts of the country. But it has continued to see an influx of imported cases, mainly involving Chinese nationals returning from abroad, while new clusters of infections in the north-eastern border provinces of Jilin and Heilongjiang have emerged in recent weeks. Wuhan also reported this month its first cluster of infections since a lockdown on the city ended on April 8, prompting authorities to warn that counter-epidemic measures could not be relaxed and to launch a campaign to test all of Wuhan's 11 million residents for COVID-19. The number of confirmed cases in the mainland stood at 82,971 and the death toll remained unchanged at 4,634.  Former NBA superstar Patrick Ewing is in isolation in hospital after testing positive. Ewing, who spent 13 of his 15 seasons in the NBA with the New York Knicks through the 80s and 90s, now coaches the men's basketball team at Georgetown University in Washington DC. The 57-year-old said he chose to share his diagnosis publicly to emphasise how dangerous the virus was. "This virus is serious and should not be taken lightly," he said. "I want to encourage everyone to stay safe and take care of yourselves and your loved ones. Now more than ever, I want to thank the healthcare workers and everyone on the front lines. I'll be fine and we will all get through this." Ewing won a national championship with Georgetown in his playing days, won two Olympic gold medals, was an NBA All Star 11 times and reached the finals with the Knicks in 1994. He was inducted into the basketball hall of fame in 2008. The WHO has identified South America as the new "epicentre" of the pandemic as the virus accelerates across South America. Brazil reported more than 2,100 deaths in the past two days, bringing its total toll to 21,048, as the number of cases soared above 330,000. The country now has the second-highest number of cases in the world, overtaking Russia and behind only the United States' official count of 1.6 million. The true number  both of cases and deaths  in Brazil is likely higher than the official count, as Latin America's top economy has been slow to ramp up testing. Across South America, infections rose and intensive care units (ICU) were swamped in Peru, Chile and Ecuador, countries lauded for imposing early and aggressive business shutdowns and quarantines. Many experts said the rising death toll across Latin America showed the limits of government action in a region where millions make a living in informal jobs and many police forces are weak or corrupt and unable to enforce restrictions. In Chile, more than 90 per cent of ICU beds were full last week in the capital, Santiago, where the main cemetery dug 1,000 emergency graves to prepare for a wave of deaths. Ecuador's Government declared a 2:00pm to 5:00am curfew in March, among other measures, but cases have swamped medical and mortuary services in the city of Guayaquil and the capital, Quito. Hundreds of people can be seen violating the curfew daily in Ecuadorian cities, many selling goods on the streets to earn enough to buy food. Malaria drug hydroxychloroquine, which US President Donald Trump says he has been taking, was tied to increased risk of death in a study of 96,000 COVID-19 patients, according to a paper published in the widely respected medical journal The Lancet. The study found people treated with hydroxychloroquine, or closely related drug chloroquine, had higher risk of in-hospital death when compared to those who had not been given the drug. Mr Trump has said he is taking hydroxychloroquine to protect against the virus, even though his administration has warned it can have deadly side effects. The head of Italy's pharmacological agency has also weighed in on the lack of data to suggest it is effective against COVID-19 as Italy conducts its own limited trials of the drug.  A Harvard University medical professor involved in the study said the results were clear. "We asked a question: is there any benefit whatsoever in using any one of these regimens in hospitalised patients with COVID-19? And the answer is a fairly conclusive no," Professor Mandeep Mehra said. "Then we asked if there's no evidence of benefit, is there evidence of harm  and that too was surprisingly a yes." Researchers reported a coronavirus vaccine developed by Chinese company CanSino Biologics appears to be safe and induced a rapid immune response in its first human trial. First-in-human studies, known as Phase I trials, are primarily designed to test safety. This vaccine did not cause any serious adverse effects, the researchers said in The Lancet, though they did report some side effects such as fever. Blood samples from the 108 vaccinated adults showed so-called neutralising antibodies and T-cell responses against the novel coronavirus, a sign of possible efficacy. "These results represent an important milestone," co-author Professor Wei Chen from the Beijing Institute of Biotechnology said in a statement. "The ability to trigger these immune responses does not necessarily indicate that the vaccine will protect humans from COVID-19. We are still a long way from this vaccine being available to all." Further studies will be needed to confirm whether the vaccine protects against infection. The first such trial is underway in Wuhan, China. The UN disarmament chief says the COVID-19 pandemic is moving the world toward increased technological innovation and online collaboration, but "cybercrime is also on the rise, with a 600 per cent increase in malicious emails during the current crisis." Izumi Nakamitsu told an informal meeting of the UN Security Council on Friday that "there have also been worrying reports of attacks against health care organisations and medical research facilities worldwide." She said growing digital dependency had increased the vulnerability to cyberattacks, and "it is estimated that one such attack takes place every 39 seconds." Estonia's Prime Minister, Juri Ratas, whose country holds the Security Council presidency and organised Friday's meeting on cyber stability and advancing responsible government behaviour in cyberspace, said: "The COVID-19 crisis has put extra pressure on our critical services in terms of cybersecurity." He said the need for "a secure and functioning cyberspace" is therefore more pressing than ever and he condemned cyberattacks targeting hospitals, medical research facilities and other infrastructure, especially during the pandemic. "Those attacks are unacceptable," Ratas said. "It will be important to hold the offenders responsible for their behaviour." Meanwhile, UN peacekeeping chief Jean-Pierre Lacroix says there have been 75 cases of COVID-19 in the UN's 13 far-flung peacekeeping missions, which have a total of 110,000 troops, police and personnel. There are 10 cases of COVID-19 in the mission in Congo, three cases in the Cyprus mission, two in Central African Republic and one each in Lebanon and the UN Truce Supervision Organisation in the Middle East. Iran has moved to open businesses, religious and cultural sites as it eases restrictions imposed to contain the coronavirus pandemic. Museums and historical sites are to reopen on Sunday to coincide with the Eid el-Fitr celebrations that end the Muslim holy fasting month of Ramadan, President Hassan Rouhani said. Holy shrines will reopen on Monday. Mr Rouhani had said last week that the shrines would open for three hours in the morning and three hours in the afternoon. Some areas of the shrines such as narrow corridors will stay shut. All workers in the country will return to work next Saturday. The President said last week that restaurants would reopen after Ramadan and sports activities would resume without spectators. Universities, but not medical schools, will reopen on June 6. Mr Rouhani said on Saturday that 88 per cent of the fatalities from COVID-19 in Iran were victims with underlying illnesses. Britain will introduce a mandatory 14-day quarantine period for travellers arriving from overseas from June 8, a measure that airlines have warned will devastate their industry. All international arrivals, including returning Britons, will be required to self-isolate and provide details of where they will be staying to the authorities. "Now we are past the peak of this virus, we must take steps to guard against imported cases triggering a resurgence of this deadly disease," said Home Secretary Priti Patel. She said those who breached the quarantine in England could be fined 1,000 pounds ($1,863), and that spot checks would be carried out by health and border officials. The quarantine measures will not apply to those arriving from the Irish Republic, and there are also exemptions for freight drivers, medical professionals and seasonal agricultural workers. Religious gatherings will resume in France after a two-month hiatus caused by the COVID-19 outbreak. The French Interior Ministry said the gatherings would be permitted from the start of June, but worshippers need to wear face masks and observe social distancing of at least 1 metre. The French Government had banned religious services until June 2 even though stores and other businesses started reopening last week. The Council of State, the country's highest administrative body, struck down the ban and the Government published a decree on Saturday allowing services to resume. France has announced 393 new cases of coronavirus in the past 24 hours, continuing a downward trend. Authorities say seven people appear to have been infected with the coronavirus at a restaurant in north-western Germany, in what would be the first such known case since restaurants started reopening in the country two weeks ago. The local government in Leer county said on Friday night that the cases, reported between Tuesday and Friday, led to at least 50 people being quarantined.  Previously, no new cases had been confirmed in the area for over a week. Germany started loosening its coronavirus restrictions on April 20 and that process has gathered pace recently.  Lower Saxony state, where Leer is located, allowed restaurants to reopen on May 11 with hygiene precautions. Colombia has reported its biggest daily increase in new coronavirus cases and deaths as the South American nation's Ministry of Health confirmed 801 new infections and 30 fatalities. Over a quarter of the new cases are in the capital city of Bogota, which has the highest number of COVID-19 infections in the country.  Nationwide, Colombia has diagnosed nearly 20,000 people with the virus. The nation has been on lockdown for nearly two months, though authorities recently began allowing some manufacturing businesses to begin operating. A wider economic opening is expected to take place throughout June. The nation's caseload has been comparatively smaller than other nations in the region: Brazil has confirmed over 300,000 cases and Peru over 110,000. Russian President Vladimir Putin said the outbreak in Russia has begun to abate, creating a positive environment for easing restrictions. Russia currently ranks third after the United States and Brazil in the number of infections with 326,448 cases, including 3,249 deaths. The Russian leader said a steady drop in new cases, from almost 7,000 new cases per day at the peak of the outbreak, to roughly 3,000 now, sets the stage for further lifting of restrictions. Mr Putin noted that the country's hospitals can accommodate over 165,000 coronavirus patients, and they are currently two-thirds occupied. He acknowledged the need to preserve hospital capacity in case of a new wave of contagion as restrictions lift. The COVID-19 mortality rate in Russia has remained remarkably low at about 1 per cent, drawing suspicions in the West that the country was under-reporting its death toll.  Russian officials have rejected the claim, saying that the low toll reflected efficient preventative measures and broad testing. A review of studies around the world by British researchers has found that people under 20 have a 56 per cent lower risk of catching COVID-19.  The review is not without its doubters, however, as some researchers such as those at University College London have said evidence remains "weak" on how likely children were to transmit the virus to others. "Our findings show children and young people appear 56 per cent less likely to contract COVID-19 from infected others," the review team said. "Susceptibility is a key part of the chain of infection, and this supports the view that children are likely to play a smaller role in transmitting the virus and proliferating the pandemic, although considerable uncertainty remains. "This new data provides essential evidence to governments around the world to inform their decision-making on whether to reopen schools and reduce or end lockdown measures." Hertz has filed for bankruptcy, unable to withstand the coronavirus pandemic that has crippled global travel and with it, the heavily indebted 102-year-old car rental company's business.  The US's number two car lease company's lenders were unwilling to grant it another extension on its auto lease debt payments past yesterday's deadline.  Hertz and its subsidiaries will continue to operate, according to a release from the company.  By the end of March, Hertz Global Holdings Inc  whose car-rental bands also include Dollar and Thrifty  had racked up $18.7 billion in debt with only $1 billion of available cash.  "No business is built for zero revenue," former CEO Kathryn Marinello said on May 12. "There's only so long that companies' reserves will carry them." In late March, Hertz shed 12,000 workers and put another 4,000 on furlough, cut vehicle acquisitions by 90 per cent and stopped all nonessential spending. Under bankruptcy protection, creditors will have to settle for less than full repayment. Its biggest creditors are banks, but the filing lists IBM, Lyft, United and Southwest Airlines as others owed between $6 million and $23 million each. The coronavirus pandemic is interrupting immunisation against diseases including measles, polio and cholera that could put the lives of nearly 80 million children under the age of 1 at risk, according to a new analysis from the World Health Organization and partners. In the new report, health officials warned that more than half of 129 countries where immunisation data were available reported moderate, severe or total suspensions of vaccination services during March and April. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "Disruption to immunisation programs from the COVID-19 pandemic threatens to unwind decades of progress against vaccine-preventable diseases like measles," WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said in a statement. UNICEF reported a significant delay in planned vaccine deliveries due to lockdown measures and a dramatic reduction in the number of available flights. "We have effective vaccines against measles, polio and cholera. While circumstances may require us to temporarily pause some immunisation efforts, these immunisations must restart as soon as possible or we risk exchanging one deadly outbreak for another," said Henrietta Fore, UNICEF's executive director. "We cannot let our fight against one disease come at the expense of long-term progress in our fight against other diseases." More than 40 of Africa's 54 nations have closed their borders, though some allow cargo and emergency transport, and 46 campaigns to vaccinate children against polio have been suspended in 38 countries, the majority of which are also in Africa. Measles campaigns have been suspended in 27 countries.  A spokesperson for British Prime Minister Boris Johnson says Government ministers trust principals to make their own decisions in allowing students back to school. The comment comes as the UK Government prepares to release its "roadmap" plan to reopen the UK. Mr Johnson's Government has faced criticism from some teachers and unions over their plan to reopen schools to some pupils from June 1.  They say the move is too early and others that they have little time to prepare buildings for a return under social distancing measures. "We continue to work closely with teachers, schools and the unions to address their concerns," the spokesman said.  "The roadmap sets out plans to get more children into schools in the safest possible way from June 1 at the earliest and we will set out more details on our plans as soon as we can. "We trust head teachers to know the best course of action for their own schools." US President Donald Trump has deemed churches and other houses of worship "essential" services and called on governors to allow them to reopen this weekend despite the threat of the coronavirus. "Today I'm identifying houses of worship  churches, synagogues and mosques  as essential places that provide essential services," said Mr Trump. He said if governors don't abide by his request, he will "override" them, though it's unclear what authority he has to do so. Mr Trump stressed the importance of churches in many communities and took issue with some of the businesses that had been allowed to reopen. "Some governors have deemed liquor stores and abortion clinics as essential" but not churches, he said. "It's not right. So I'm correcting this injustice and calling houses of worship essential." "These are places that hold our society together and keep our people united. The people are demanding to go to church and synagogue, go to their mosque," he said. ABC/wires 
How a confusing JobKeeper form made the coronavirus job crisis look worse than it actually is
It's a $60 billion error. After touting the impact of the $130 billion JobKeeper package  supposedly keeping about 6.5 million Australians connected to their employers while providing them with liveable pay  the Federal Government has acknowledged its figures were massively overstated. The package is instead projected to cost only $70 billion, and the Government has confirmed only 3.5 million Australians are actually receiving the payment. It's a huge difference from what was projected, but it comes down to about 1,000 businesses messing up their paperwork while applying for the scheme. Here's what happened. As with any application for government help, applying for the JobKeeper payment involves paperwork. More than 910,000 businesses have applied for the scheme, with 759,000 having already finalised their employee declarations, meaning they are eligible to receive payments. But some of those businesses, it seems, made mistakes while filling out their forms. According to the Australian Tax Office (ATO), which is responsible for administering JobKeeper payments, the errors weren't picked up because its focus was on processing payments as quickly as possible. One of the most common mistakes noted by the ATO was businesses mixing up the number of workers they employed with the amount they expected workers to receive. For instance, 550 businesses with just one eligible employee filled out the corresponding section of their forms with "1,500"  presumably in reference to the $1,500-per-fortnight payment made to all eligible workers. Those 550 businesses would have been responsible for an additional 825,000 people being added to the scheme  people that did not exist. But the ultimate discrepancy between the projected and actual number of people on JobKeeper was about 3 million. That still leaves a difference of more than 2.1 million people between the actual numbers and what was initially projected. When the Government first announced the JobKeeper scheme, it said it would cost $130 billion and help about 6 million employees. Those numbers were based on Treasury estimates on the projected need for the scheme. First estimates of the cost of the program were formulated at the height of the coronavirus crisis, with Treasury fearing the health impacts would be severe. As businesses began to register their interest in signing up for the scheme, the numbers appeared to be in line with initial estimates. But Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said on Friday that the economy was doing better than Treasury initially estimated and as a result, fewer people were signing up for JobKeeper. The 1,000 businesses responsible for the error represent just over 0.1 per cent of the 910,000 businesses that have registered for JobKeeper. But the $60 billion reduction in the projected cost of the scheme suggests that small portion was receiving nearly half the money allocated to the scheme. ATO Second Commissioner Jeremy Hirschhorn said it appeared those applicants misunderstood the question on their application forms. "With hindsight, perhaps the form could have been more straightforward, however I do note that only 1,000 of the 900,000 misinterpreted the question," he said. He said that no extra money was paid to businesses, as the question that was misunderstood by some was not linked to payments. "We ask a question for analytical purposes only, not for payment purposes," he said. "It made not one difference to the amount we paid." 
Clive Palmer threatens High Court challenge to WA coronavirus border closure after being denied entry
Billionaire mining magnate Clive Palmer has lashed out at Premier Mark McGowan after being refused entry into Western Australia, threatening a High Court challenge to the state's strict state border closure. Mr Palmer said he planned to take the matter to the High Court within days. "We'll be filing papers on Monday and proceeding with a declaration that the lockdown border closure of Western Australia is unconstitutional," he said. "And there's no reason for it at the present time, and that it's just an impediment to the workforce getting back to work and the prosperity of the state." Mr Palmer described the border closure as stupidity on the part of the WA Government. "What [Mr McGowan] is trying to do is against the Australian constitution, and I've got no doubt the High Court will slap him down very quickly," he said. "It's absolute stupidity. What's going to happen in three or four months when our economy is destroyed, people haven't got jobs. "That's not an outcome that we want." He said he would be referencing two sections of the constitution which stated trade and travel between states should be free unless lives were in danger. Mr Palmer also said he did not agree to "totalitarian" conditions which may have allowed him to receive an exemption if he had applied again. "The conditions that they wanted to place on me were that I would tell them where I was going, who I was talking to, and what the subject matter of those conversations was," he said "Which I wasn't prepared to do, that's my private business." The WA Police Force would not confirm if Mr Palmer's application was rejected, saying it would not comment on individual cases. But Premier Mark McGowan said he supported the WA Police Commissioner's decision. "The Police Commissioner makes these decisions based upon the law and the rules we've put in place to protect our citizens," he said. "So, I endorse the Police Commissioner's decision here. He's made it on proper grounds and with the correct purpose behind it. "[He] has clearly said to Mr Palmer that he can't fly in and fly out because he's not one of the exempt people. "The Police Commissioner has made many decisions to keep people out." Mr McGowan said so much work had been done to tackle the virus and he did not want to risk infection coming in from anywhere. "We are trying to keep the health of West Australians safe, and if Mr Palmer doesn't like it  he's subject to the law just like everyone else." WA has closed its borders to the east for the first time in history. Here's how you might be affected. "The medical advice we have is very clear, that our interstate border is important to protect the health of West Australians. He also said he hoped Mr Palmer's case did not have a chance in the High Court. "Well I hope not," he said. "We will fight him in the High Court. "All of our legal advice says that putting in place the rules to protect our state based upon health grounds is justified. "So we've done it for the right reasons to protect the people of Western Australia." 
NT Government establishes Territory Economic Reconstruction Commission to help coronavirus recovery
Chief Minister Michael Gunner says the Northern Territory is "uniquely positioned" to lead Australia's post-pandemic economic recovery and has established a special commission to figure out exactly how to capitalise on the crisis. In announcing the initial membership of the Territory Economic Reconstruction Commission on Friday, Mr Gunner said Australia was going through a "once-in-a-lifetime crisis" which could also be a "once-in-a-lifetime opportunity" for the Territory. Mr Gunner said post-COVID-19, Australia would have to become more self-reliant and the future for manufacturing was in the North. "We look at our solar reserves and our gas reserves and we are uniquely positioned to solve Australia's problems  we need to take advantage of that opportunity," he said. Mr Gunner said the Commission would investigate how to create jobs in the NT, attract investment and build on its strategic advantages  establishing it as "Australia's comeback capital". "We are a $26 billion economy right now, I believe we can be a $40 billion economy by 2030 with 35,000 new jobs," he said.  See more news and analysis about this year's NT election. But it will be at least six months until any of the Commissions' recovery plans become a reality  with an interim report expected to be handed down in late-July and a final report in November. Commission members include Gary Higgins, who retired as opposition leader in January; Infrastructure Australia CEO Romilly Madew; NT Treaty Commissioner Mick Dodson; Beyond Zero Emissions CEO Eytan Lenko; former NT chief minister Paul Henderson; former secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet Martin Parkinson and former CEO of Westpac Gail Kelly.  Next week, Mr Gunner will announce two more Commission members and its co-chairs.  Each of the nine members can earn up to $44,000 a year for their contribution, which means for six months' work each person can pocket up to $22,000  a total cost to the taxpayer of $198,000.  Opposition Leader Lia Finocchiaro, who took the helm at the Country Liberal Party in January, criticised Mr Gunner's fiscal management over his Government's term  claiming the Committee would not be necessary if the NT Government had managed the books better. "For four years under Labor our economy has become the worst-performing economy in the nation," she said. "It is not credible three months out from the election for the Gunner Government to say to Territorians: 'we have a plan'. The fact is, they don't." "The need for this reconstruction commission really reflects the inability of the Gunner Labor Government to to generate growth in our economy." Yesterday, the NT announced it had zero active cases of coronavirus, with all 29 confirmed cases of COVID-19 now recovered.  Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Despite the good news and calls from industry, Mr Gunner said he would not commit to a date when the NT's borders would re-open.  "I know that the calls for us to quickly relax our hard borders will grow louder," he said.  "The danger of coronavirus is still out there and we need to keep it out." Mr Gunner said as soon as there was a "hard date" for when the NT's strict border security measures would ease, he would make the announcement and ensure there was plenty of time for NT businesses to plan their recovery. 
US secures 300 million potential coronavirus vaccines after Government gives drug-maker $1.8 billion
The United States has secured almost a third of the first 1 billion doses planned for AstraZeneca's experimental COVID-19 vaccine by pledging up to $US1.2 billion ($1.84 billion), as world powers scramble for medicines to get their economies back to work. While not yet proven to be effective against the coronavirus, vaccines are seen by world leaders as the only real way to restart their stalled economies and even to get an edge over global competitors. After US President Donald Trump demanded a vaccine, the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) agreed to provide up to $US1.2 billion to accelerate British drug maker AstraZeneca's vaccine development and secure 300 million doses for the United States  which has a population of almost 330 million. "This contract with AstraZeneca is a major milestone in Operation Warp Speed's work toward a safe, effective, widely available vaccine by 2021," US Health Secretary Alex Azar said.  The first doses could be available in the United States as early as October, according to a statement from the HHS. The vaccine was developed by the University of Oxford and licensed to AstraZeneca.  Immunity to the new coronavirus is uncertain and so the use of vaccines is unclear. The US deal allows a late-stage, or phase three, clinical trial of the vaccine with 30,000 people in the United States. England-based AstraZeneca said it had concluded agreements for at least 400 million doses of the vaccine and secured manufacturing capacity for 1 billion doses. The first deliveries of the vaccines are due in September. Now the most valuable company on Britain's blue-chip FTSE 100 Index, AstraZeneca has already agreed to deliver 100 million doses to people in Britain, with 30 million as soon as September. Ministers have promised Britain will get first access to the vaccine. With leaders across the world surveying some of the worst economic destruction since World War II and the deaths of more than 327,000 people, many are scrambling for a vaccine. The US Government has struck deals to support vaccine development with Johnson & Johnson (J&J), Moderna and Sanofi, sparking fears the richest countries will be able to protect their citizens first. Sanofi's chief angered the French Government earlier this month when he said vaccine doses produced in the United States could go to US patients first, given the country had supported the research financially. "We have a lot of things happening on the vaccine front or the therapeutic front," Mr Trump told reporters at the White House when asked about the AstraZeneca announcement.  AstraZeneca said it was in talks with governments and partners around the world  such as the Serum Institute of India  to increase access and production and is speaking to various organisations on fair allocation and distribution. The Serum Institute of India, the world's largest maker of vaccines by volume, has dedicated one of its facilities with a capacity to produce up to 400 million doses annually to producing the Oxford vaccine. "We are scaling up on a conservative basis of about 4-5 million doses a month, to begin with," Chief Executive Adar Poonawalla told Reuters, adding the company was in discussions with AstraZeneca. A phase one and two clinical trial of the vaccine began last month to assess safety, immunogenicity and efficacy in over 1,000 healthy volunteers aged 18 to 55 across several trial centres in southern England.  Data from the trial is expected shortly. There are currently no approved treatments or vaccines for COVID-19. Governments, drug makers and researchers are working on around 100 programs.  Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Experts are predicting a safe, effective means of preventing the disease could take 12 to 18 months to develop. Only a handful of the vaccines in development have advanced to human trials, an indicator of safety and efficacy, and the stage at which most fail. "AstraZeneca recognises that the vaccine may not work but is committed to progressing the clinical program with speed and scaling up manufacturing at risk," a company statement said. Other drug makers are in various stages of vaccine development. US-based Inovio Pharmaceuticals said on Wednesday its experimental vaccine produced protective antibodies and immune system responses in mice and guinea pigs. And Moderna this week released positive data for its potential vaccine, which it said produced protective antibodies in a small group of healthy volunteers. Reuters 
People in other countries have been told to wear masks to protect from coronavirus. Australia isn't in the same boat
Coronavirus restrictions in Australia, are easing and that means there's more and more people getting out and about.  But COVID-19 is still out there and people have been urged to be cautious and stay vigilant about protecting themselves as best they can. In other countries, that protection includes a face mask  some choose to wear them, others have to. In Australia, though, the broad advice remains that most people don't need one.  Here's what we know so far about why that is and whether it's likely to change.  Many countries around the world, as well as some US states, have implemented various directions for people to wear face masks in public places to try and limit the spread of coronavirus. In parts of Asia, it's almost expected out of courtesy and safety to wear a face mask, but places like Singapore have now introduced fines if people don't wear one. And in the US, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends "wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain". Some states have enforced the use of masks in shops or other public spaces and the CDC has encouraged people to make their own cloth masks. In Australia, the current advice from the Federal Government is that the majority of people won't benefit from wearing a surgical mask and if you're well, you don't need one. There are different requirements for people who have returned from certain locations overseas, who think may they have been in contact with a confirmed case of coronavirus or who have tested positive, but broadly, surgical masks aren't strongly recommended or required. University of the Sunshine Coast nursing program leader Matt Mason says the biggest difference between those countries and Australia is the level of risk. "The main difference is that we simply don't have the same burden of disease that America or the UK or some of the other countries have," he says. "The risk of catching the disease is much, much lower here because we simply don't have it circulating to the same extent that America has." Australia's advice on face masks currently matches up with the World Health Organization, which recommends that if you're healthy, you only need to wear a mask if you're caring for someone with COVID-19. The quick answer is that healthy people still don't need to wear a mask. University of New South Wales infectious disease epidemiologist Abrar Chughtai says that advice isn't expected to change in Australia in the near future unless there's a significant spike in cases.  "It's not to protect healthy people, but to prevent the spread of infection," he says. "Generally, masks aren't very good to protect healthy people. "At some stage, if we have a second wave or widespread cases in the community, I'm sure the Australian Government will also recommend the use of masks but at this stage, you should not need one." There's also no rule that says you can't wear a mask  but it's important to think about how you're wearing it. "I don't think there's any problem with people wanting to wear a mask. But there are some things we need to consider," Mr Mason says. "The risks for the person who's wearing them come from how they interact with that mask in terms of taking it on and off, maybe reusing it, or fiddling with it while they're wearing it. "While a mask can do that because it's a physical barrier, what we do see is that people fiddle with the mask and are therefore putting your hands, which could be dirty, around your face." Nope, you don't really need gloves either. Gloves, like masks, can act as a barrier between your hands and whatever you're touching, but that means pretty much nothing if you still touch your face with gloves on. Dr Chughtai says if you're out and about, gloves can actually lead you to wash your hands less  and that's not good. "The virus will not transmit through skin, it needs a portal of entry and that could be through the mouth, nose or eyes," he says. "The general public don't need to use gloves. They should wash their hands and  avoid touching their face." Gloves are also similar to masks in that they're single-use. So, if you're not working in a high-contact environment and you're powering through a new pair every time you touch something different, that's a lot of demand and a lot of waste. "It's probably easier and better for the environment just to have alcohol-based hand sanitiser and clean your hands more frequently than to wear gloves," Mr Mason says. "Again, gloves give you that false sense of security that you're protected, but you're really not. "For people who are out and about or returning to work, that attention to detail on hand hygiene and trying not to transfer things from the environment to your face is going to be really important." Not much different from the advice we've been given from the start: wash your hands, don't touch your face and stay home if you're sick. As restrictions ease, that could become trickier  but Mr Mason says we have to try. "Something we're potentially likely to see here in Australia is people may put a mask on when they're not feeling 100 per cent and go to work or school, which is what we don't want people doing," he says. "Even though that mask is designed to stop someone coughing and spluttering over others, we don't want unwell people at work. "There's a whole range of social reasons why that's an easy thing to say and not an easy thing to do, because Australia is a highly casualised workforce." Dr Chughtai says the most important thing at this stage is to maintain social distancing and keep washing your hands. "We don't need to panic. People should focus on Government instructions like keeping a safe distance," he says. 
Allan Border says that if the coronavirus pandemic stops cricket's World T20, the IPL should not replace it
Former Australian captain Allan Border has spoken out against suggestions the IPL could be scheduled in place of the World T20 tournament later this year, describing it as a "money grab" by Indian cricket.      The World T20 is scheduled to run from October 18 to November 15 this year at various venues across Australia. However, the coronavirus pandemic  which has already caused the postponement or cancellation of many major sporting events in this country and overseas  has placed the future of this year's tournament in doubt. Reports this week have suggested that the Indian cricket board, the BCCI, is looking at trying to reschedule the lucrative IPL tournament for the same window as the World T20. Border told ABC's Grandstand Cafe radio program he would not agree with any attempt to run the IPL in place of the world tournament. "[I'm] not happy with that, the world game should take precedence over a local competition," Border said. "So, the World T20, if that can't go ahead, I don't think the IPL can go ahead. "I would question that decision [to replace it]  it's just a money grab, isn't it, that one? "The World T20 should take precedence, for sure." Asked what impression it would leave if India was able to go ahead with the IPL in an alternative window, Border said it would send the wrong signal to world cricket. "That would be just shut the gate, you know, India running the game. "They're pretty close to it now, but I suppose if you're responsible for 80 per cent of global [cricket] income, you're going to have a fair say in what goes on, I get that," Border said. "But I think the world game can't allow that to happen. "The home boards should stop their players going to the IPL, if that's the case. "I don't think you can have India superseding what the international game has in place. That would be going down the wrong path." Border was also asked about the Sheffield Shield's relevance to producing Australian Test cricketers, as questions are raised over the domestic competition's place in the schedule for the summer of cricket. "I feel it does [have relevance], if you talk to the players they are of that opinion as well, they love playing Sheffield Shield cricket," he said. "I think it still has the same relevance. I think it's got to be very hard to develop good, all-round cricketers, just through short-form cricket. "I think the long form of the game really does set your technique in place as a bowler or as a batsman, and then you can move into those other, shorter forms of the game. "There's a bit more power-hitting involved and different tactics as a bowler  developing your skills there, but the ultimate is, I think, to play that first-class cricket and that area of the game really develops your best players." The former Australian skipper said authorities would have to relax the rules on tampering with cricket balls, as the governing body looks at its response to the coronavirus. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. An ICC committee has this week recommended a rule change to stop the use of saliva to shine the ball, with a decision expected next month. "I suppose sweat and saliva are going to be very similar  if you've got the virus, you're going to pass it on, aren't you? Border said. "They will obviously have to relax the rules over polishing the cricket ball with some sort of substance other than sweat or saliva. "Whether you're allowed to scratch it, or put saliva to shine it on one side, or picking the seam  there's always something going on about the cricket ball, isn't there? "It's a very important part of our game, particularly the Test match game, or the longer-form game, rather than white-ball cricket. "It will be a challenge to see what the powers-that-be come up with  the bowlers have got to be able to do something with the cricket ball, not just let the ball go so the batsmen can smash it everywhere. "They've got to be able to shine the ball to try and extract some swing, that type of thing." 
Taste of Tasmania set to be cancelled for 2020 amid coronavirus restrictions
The Taste of Tasmania, which has been a key event on the Hobart social calendar for more than 30 years, looks set to be cancelled for the first time in its history as a result of uncertainty around the coronavirus pandemic and the council's struggling finances.  Hobart City Council officers have recommended the event  which usually costs ratepayers about $1 million  not go ahead this year "due to the number of uncertainties for large events coupled with Council's need to reprioritise funding for the coming year". Officers said the event would be "difficult to justify" at a time when the Council "really needs the money elsewhere". The Taste of Tasmania runs between Christmas and New Year's Eve, and averages about 30,000 attendees each day.  It is also a focal point for the Sydney-to-Hobart yacht race with festivalgoers celebrating the finish and watching the rest of the fleet arrive. Race organisers are yet to make any announcements about this year's event. The Taste decision is another blow to festival tourism after the mid-winter event Dark Mofo was also canned this year.  Hobart Mayor Anna Reynolds said the council's revenue was expected to fall by $22 million, or almost 20 per cent of the council's budget, due to the pandemic.  "We are having to make cuts in a whole range of places," she said.  "Given commercial sponsorship of the Taste would probably be very hard to get this year it would just be too risky for our ratepayers to fund a Taste that might not be able to happen, might have to be really small, and might be still very risky in the current environment. "An event as large and complex as the Taste does need lead time, and given the uncertainty around the tourism industry, the rules around large gatherings, but also just our budget as a city ... it's really not practical to have the Taste this year." In a statement, the Tasmanian Government said its funding contribution to the event of $500,000 over two years was secure but urged the council to find an alternative. "Now is not the time to abandon such an important event for Tasmania and while it is still too early to determine whether an event that attracts that many people can go ahead, we would encourage the council to work with all relevant stakeholders to plan for and identify options that work for all," it said. The Tourism Industry is concerned cancelling the event could be the final straw for many small stallholders who rely on the event for their survival.  Daniel Leesong, chairman of the Tourism Industry Council Tasmania and operator of Coal River Farm, said the Taste was too important not to go ahead, and a private operator might need to step in.  Mr Leesong said if the council could not take responsibility for the event, the industry would need to band together to find an alternative model "simply because it's a marquee event that's so successful". "Many of the stallholders rely on the Taste for their significant revenue source for their annual turnover," he said.  "Not only is it going to have an immediate negative impact for a lot of the smaller stall holders, but it's also going to have a potentially fatal impact long term.  "Those businesses simply won't be able to survive." Ghost Rock Vineyard owner Alicia Peardon has been forced to shut her cellar door and eatery for the time being.  The north-west based business has a stall at the Taste every year, and Ms Peardon said the expected cancellation was disappointing but understandable.  "It's a huge impact for Tasmania and for producers like us because we do rely quite heavily on it, but it's not surprising either given the current circumstances," she said.  "As long as social distancing is around it's hard to see how events like that can go ahead." Council officers have recommended consideration be given to a smaller New Year's Eve event. "There is no doubt 2020 has been and will be an extremely hard year for our community and our businesses and a smaller celebration of this could be a fitting way to see out the year," the report said. A decision on whether the Taste goes ahead will be made by the council on Monday.  
JobKeeper numbers cut by 3 million after Federal Government reveals accounting bungle in coronavirus stimulus program
The number of people on JobKeeper has been revised down by 3 million, with Treasury and the Australian Tax Office (ATO) blaming businesses for making "significant errors" in their applications. The estimated cost of the program has been nearly halved from $130 billion to about $70 billion. In a statement, Treasury and the ATO said the mistake came from businesses reporting how much financial assistance they expected to receive, instead of how many employees they thought would be eligible. "For example, over 500 businesses with '1' eligible employee reported a figure of '1,500' (which is the amount of JobKeeper payment they would expect to receive for each fortnight for that employee)," the departments said. ATO Second Commissioner Jeremy Hirschhorn said the error was discovered at the start of this week and the Treasurer was told about the issue on Thursday evening. "With hindsight, perhaps the form could have been more straightforward," he said.  "The question was reasonably clear, it is just unfortunate that 1,000 employers misunderstood it."   Based on the original estimates, Treasury believed the program would subsidise the wages of 6.5 million workers. That has now been revised down to 3.5 million. Federal Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said the error was "good news" and "importantly" the error contained "no consequences for JobKeeper payments that have already been made". "It is welcome news that the impact on the public purse from the program will not be as great as initially estimated," he said. Speaking on Afternoon Briefing, Mr Frydenberg said the Government would not be reallocating the rest of the forecast funding for JobKeeper to other areas, saying it was all "borrowed money" and the error meant less would have to be repaid by future generations. "This is a very uncertain time. I'm not blaming Treasury; I'm not blaming the ATO. No underpayments were made, no overpayments were made." Despite the Treasurer ruling out diverting the unspent money elsewhere, groups including the Council of Small Business, described the error as an opportunity for the Government to expand the scheme. "Migrant workers or people on visas who haven't been eligible so far, there's a lot of them that work for small businesses and I know it's been a concern for a lot of employers out there," Council chief executive officer Peter Strong said. "So, I suggest the Government should have a look at that." Federal Labor leader Anthony Albanese described the bungle as "an absolute shambles". "This is a mistake you could have seen from space," he said. "This is a Government that couldn't run a bath, let alone be good economic managers. "The fact is if you can't get this right, how can you get the economic recovery right?" The JobKeeper scheme is the centrepiece of the Government's coronavirus support package, offering businesses who have experienced a downturn in revenue a wage subsidy for eligible workers. The error was discovered by the ATO and Treasury after they analysed the amounts that were being paid out by the scheme to businesses and comparing them with the estimates of how many employees would be eligible. "It was not picked up by the ATO earlier as their primary focus in the first fortnight of JobKeeper payments was on ensuring that JobKeeper payments were paid promptly to those eligible for them, and not paid to those who were ineligible," the departments said. "These initial estimates from businesses of employees covered are not linked to payments, and so were not as carefully analysed." 
Amidst the coronavirus pandemic and heightened global tensions, China makes its move on Hong Kong
On September the 11th 2001, not half an hour after the second plane smashed into the twin towers, a ministerial adviser in the UK sent an email saying, "it's now a very good day to get out anything we want to bury".  She saw a crisis as an opportunity. So, it appears to be seen in Beijing.  With the world focused on a pandemic that started in China, now is the moment chosen by the Chinese leadership to introduce a security law.  Pro-democracy activists in Hong Kong fear it could be the death of their beloved territory.  Dennis Kwok is a Civic Party politician and warned that if the law comes into force "one country, two systems will officially be erased. This is the end of Hong Kong".  During last year's sometimes violent protests, the constant question was 'what is Beijing going to do?' Now we know.  During the turmoil, there was surprise among some that the authorities in China did not directly intervene, even though it had troops stationed in the territory and it appeared Chinese soldiers and equipment were being massed on the border.  Perhaps the explanation was the global reaction to the bloody crushing of the Tiananmen Square protests in 1989.  In Australia, a sobbing prime minister Bob Hawke condemned the massacre and allowed Chinese students in our country to remain here.  The Chinese Government took years to move on from being seen as a pariah state.  Ironically the very virus that has drawn the world's attention provides a handy diversion from the country where it all started.  Not that the proposed new law is going totally unnoticed.  President Trump has threatened to react but has not said what he has in mind. Even a few months ago the Chinese might have been more cautious and fearful of a negative reaction, especially from the US. But with Donald Trump recently in full anti-Chinese flight, there is not so much to lose anymore. The trade wars between the US and China have been eclipsed by the US President's condemnation of Beijing for its handling of COVID-19.  If it's China's fault, therefore responsibility for the world's worst death toll can't be his.  Trump's China tirades appear central to his re-election strategy.  He blames America's horrible death toll and its damaged economy on a nation that, for now, feels less inclined to worry about Washington's opinions.  And it would have been surprising if the Chinese leadership had not developed a strategy to counter the pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong.  Add to that the muscular promotion of expansionist nationalism under Xi Jinping and the stage is again set for more trouble ahead, and not just in Hong Kong.  The Taiwanese leadership will be watching with alarm. Imposing new laws is just the first step. The question then is enforcement.  The very existence of sedition legislation may act as a brake on some protesters who fear they could be jailed for years on orders from Beijing.  But it would be naive to underestimate the determination of many in Hong Kong who have previously spent months battling in the streets against what they see as Beijing's creeping authoritarianism in the territory.  If, as expected, the laws are approved, then we will hear diplomatic protests from the US, Britain, and possibly, Australia and others.  But with the world focused on COVID-19, it probably won't unduly worry the Chinese leadership.  The vague threat of action by Trump may have consequences, but the President's promises are not always followed by action. From the Chinese Government's point of view Hong Kong is a problem to be managed. And this law, it appears, is the mechanism.  Xi Jinping will not lose sleep worrying about the erosion of democratic freedoms enshrined in the 50-year agreement signed with Britain 23 years ago But do not expect Hong Kongers to simply take it. The streets will most likely again become battlefields.  Despite the new threats of arrest and prosecution, many who maintained the rage last year will feel even more strongly there is nothing left to lose. It feels like a collision is inevitable. How, where and when is impossible to know. But clearly the Chinese leadership is feeling strong enough to risk whatever lies ahead. 
Violet Town farmers find global success during coronavirus pandemic
An online food network platform developed in Violet Town has taken off across the world as producers look for alternative ways to sell produce. Serenity Hill and Kirsten Larsen, cofounders of the Open Food Network, launched the not-for-profit platform in 2012 after noticing a gap in the market. "We realised supply chains were a critical problem," Ms Larsen said. "There was a disconnect between farmers doing great sustainable farming and the customers that wanted it." Ms Larsen said the platform connected farmers with their communities and put the power of buying and selling back into the hands of the consumer and producer. "We wanted to get more of the retail dollar in farmers pockets and support more sustainable food," she said. The platform acts as a directory where anyone can create a profile and be located through a simple search on a map. Producers can also create their own shop where they can collect payment and sell produce. "It's particularly designed to support the different distribution systems," Ms Larsen said. "Producers can set up a bunch of different shipping methods such as drop-off to people's houses, have a collection point, or pick-up from farms." What started as a grass roots initiative now spans 13 countries, among them Brazil, the Philippines and Italy. Ms Hill said the first global affiliates  and the biggest  were the UK and France. "Canada and the US have also come along and joined the global collective," she said. Subscribe to Rural RoundUp: Stories from the farm. More farmers got on board when the pandemic hit and supply chains began to shut down, along with many farmers' markets, restaurants and cafes. Ms Hill said producers had to start searching for alternative ways to sell their products, leading to a major expansion of the platform. "COVID-19 really was the catalyst," she said. "We had a tenfold increase in people signing up for the platform and a tenfold increase in turn over through the platform." Ms Larsen said it was critical to get the framework right . "It's not about us doing it," she said. "It's about how we create a space so people can see the possibilities and get onboard to make it happen for themselves." 
China doesn't set GDP target, promises more than $400b to prop up coronavirus-hit economy
China's Government has announced close to $430 billion worth of stimulus funding to help the world's second-largest economy remain stable. The battle against the coronavirus "has not yet come to an end," Premier Li Keqiang warned in a report to the National People's Congress of China. He called on the country to "redouble our efforts" to revive the struggling economy, and said Beijing would skip setting a growth target in order to focus on fighting the disease.  The world's second-largest economy contracted by 6.8 per cent in the three months ending in March after factories, offices, travel and other businesses were shut down to fight the virus.  Mr Li said Beijing would give local governments 2 trillion yuan ($429 billion) to spend on preventing job losses, making sure the public's basic needs were met and helping private companies survive. China, where the pandemic began in December, was the first economy to reopen but is struggling to revive activity.  Private sector analysts say as many as 30 per cent of the country's 442 million urban workers  or as many as 130 million people  lost jobs at least temporarily when the economy shut down to fight the virus, and as many as 25 million jobs might be lost for good this year.  The Government's budget deficit will swell by 1 trillion yuan ($214 billion) this year to help meet targets including creating 9 million new urban jobs, Mr Li said.  "These are extraordinary measures for an unusual time," he said in his nationally televised speech. Read more about coronavirus:A breakdown of which restrictions will be eased across Australia this weekAnatomy of an outbreak: How the Ruby Princess nightmare unfolded Mr Li said the ruling Communist Party would not set a GDP target, usually a closely watched feature of government plans, due to the "great uncertainty" of the epidemic. Factories and shops have reopened but consumer spending, the main engine of economic growth, is weak. Forecasters say China is likely to face a wave of politically volatile job losses later in the year due to weak US and European demand for Chinese exports. Mr Li warned that ensuring economic growth was "of crucial significance" and said pressure on employment had "risen significantly." The announcement comes as trade tensions between China and Australia continue to be strained.  China's top diplomat in Western Australia, Consul General Dong Zhihua, returned to Shanghai this week after the country implemented tariffs on Australian barley.   Australia's barley exports to China were worth $600 million in 2019, and there are fears the new tariffs could decimate the industry. Western Australia will suffer the most, with 88 per cent of Australia's barley exports coming from the state.  ABC/AP 
Home schooling during coronavirus overwhelmed many parents. Why your best was 'good enough'
Parents grappling with helping their children learn remotely during the coronavirus pandemic might breathe a little easier knowing the situation almost sent one of the country's most loved educators "berserk".  Children's author Mem Fox said it only took two days of trying to teach her grandchild maths to push her to the edge. Fox worked as an educator for decades but said it did little to prepare her for the frustration of teaching a primary school student how to multiply. "The methods of teaching have changed  we weren't taught the techniques they're using now so I was trying to learn while teaching and it made me feel like weeping with ineptitude," she said. Students in NSW and Queensland will head back to school full-time from Monday, ending eight weeks of remote learning for all children except those with parents who work in essential services. At the height of the coronavirus pandemic, school attendance rates were roughly 10 per cent in NSW. In Victoria, students in prep, Year 1, Year 2, Year 11 and Year 12 will return to school on Tuesday, May 26, and those from Year 3 to Year 10 are expected to return on June 9. WA students have already returned, after being ordered back into classrooms on May 18. A survey of 10,000 teachers found only 35 per cent of teachers felt students had adequate resources at home  including having a freely available adult on hand to assist, along with technology or even a desk. While the time spent at home varied from state to state, anecdotal evidence suggests many parents felt overwhelmed with their newfound responsibilities. Pasi Sahlberg, from the Gonski Institute at the University of NSW, assured parents that learning comes in many forms. "The cold fact is most of the information they're taught at school they forget anyway," he said. "If you did your best that's good enough." Professor Sahlberg, who is a renowned international education expert, said students' emotional wellbeing will be more important than their cognitive learning over the next few months. "They're probably not showing it but coping with the pandemic means there's a lot going through their little minds," he said. He said making sure children felt happy and safe was more important than catching up on missed lessons. Ms Fox wants parents and grandparents feeling inadequate to know their attempts at remote learning, were unlikely to have a lasting impact. "I think kids can go off for six months on a boat trip and come back and be fine," she said. The author said she "nearly went berserk" trying to home school her grandchildren and had a simple message for anyone who thinks parents did not need to become teachers during the pandemic. "That's absolutely crap," she said. "You can't be at home with your kids without taking on the teacher role  that's a contradiction in terms." "You had to guide, explain, unpick problems, encourage, challenge, be kind, be strict  everything a teacher had to do  without a four-year degree to prepare them." 
Queensland trio terminate Australian rugby contracts amid pay dispute during coronavirus shutdown
Three Queensland Reds players, including Wallabies lock Izack Rodda, have ended a stand-off with Rugby Australia (RA) by terminating their contracts. Rodda, along with Reds teammates Harry Hockings and Isaac Lucas, had refused to take short-term pay cuts of an average 60 per cent that their Australian Super Rugby counterparts accepted following the suspension of the competition because of the coronavirus pandemic. This move prompted the Reds to stand down the three players ahead of last Monday's return to training. The players' agent, Anthony Picone, argued the Reds had no legal grounds to do so and this morning he confirmed the termination of their RA and Queensland Rugby Union (QRU) contracts. "It is disappointing the QRU chose to air the issues publicly," Picone said in a statement. "Given the parlous state of rugby in Australia and Queensland we offered the organisation the opportunity to deal with these matters in private and confidentially. This offer was rejected." The trio were the only players of the 192 Australian Super Rugby professionals to baulk at the salary hits that will be revised once a schedule and broadcast deal is finalised for the truncated competition due to begin in July. Rodda, who has played 25 Tests for the Wallabies, was reportedly at odds with Reds coach Brad Thorn and seeking a move to a rival Australian team. Hockings, a lock who is regarded as one of the rising stars of Australian rugby, and fly half Lucas were believed to be assessing their options overseas. Rodda and Lucas were both contracted until 2023, while Hockings was off contract at the end of this season. "This is their livelihood. It is only reasonable that talented players want to secure stable employment during these times," Picone said. Picone has long ruffled feathers at the Reds. He arranged a move to Japan for former Reds captain Samu Kerevi last year, while he also facilitated the exits of Wallabies players Will Genia and Liam Gill. RA and QRU are yet to comment on the decision made by the three players. The development comes after RA made changes to its leadership team in recent weeks, as it struggles to meet the financial challenges caused by the coronavirus shutdown. Hamish McLennan was announced as its new chairman last week, while Rob Clarke was appointed interim chief executive earlier this month. Clarke replaced Raelene Castle, who stood down as chief executive in April. AAP 
Winter woollies arrive just in time for Indigenous community in coronavirus lockdown
Donations of warm clothing have been distributed to locked-down residents at a central Queensland Indigenous community just ahead of an expected cold snap. The eased restrictions were cancelled after a confirmed case of COVID-19 in Rockhampton, so the community has relied on donations of warm clothing Woorabinda has been in lockdown for two months and last week the community voted to ease restrictions enough to allow residents to do essential shopping in Rockhampton over the following two Saturdays. This was cancelled after a nurse in Rockhampton was diagnosed with COVID-19, so the community put out a call for donations  and it was answered. Warm clothes, blankets, towels and shoes were delivered this week and the Red Cross coordinated distribution to the community just in time for overnight temperatures falling as low as two degrees in some parts of central Queensland this weekend. Red Cross service manager Rhonda Hill said the arrival of winter woollies was a highlight in a challenging time.  "People are still in good spirits, but it was a little disheartening, especially after the community vote, and we were going to get out and get the winter clothes," said Ms Hill. "It is what it is, and we understand and accept it.  "It's about our safety, especially our elders." Tight restrictions under the Federal Biosecurity Act mean any resident who leaves must quarantine for 14 days before returning.  Woorabinda Aboriginal Shire Council negotiated two 12-hour windows for essential shopping with the local disaster management group before the COVID-19 case in Rockhampton. It will review the situation next week.  Since the lockdown, a transfer station at the entrance to Woorabinda is a link to the outside world where supplies are left twice a week. It also gives families an opportunity to see each other. "It's quite hard for grandparents to see grandchildren  they just want to hug but they can't do that because we've got to respect the 1.5 metre distance," Ms Hill said. "But seeing them has given us an opportunity to have that peace of mind." The Red Cross and other organisations in Woorabinda collect goods delivered to the station, sanitise them and organise collection by the family. "This brings such a relief to families and it's well received by the community," Ms Hill said. 
NSW coronavirus restrictions relaxed for restaurants, pubs and cafes, Premier Gladys Berejiklian reveals
Premier Gladys Berejiklian says pubs, cafes and restaurants will be able to serve up to 50 people at a time from June 1, as NSW coronavirus cases continue to decline. The Premier described expanding the social-distancing limits as a "big step" in the state's economic recovery from COVID-19. Under the new measures, hospitality venues will be required to adhere to strict guidelines to operate: Since last Friday, pubs, restaurants and cafes have been able to serve a maximum of 10 patrons at a time in NSW. But the new, more relaxed restrictions, mean Australia's worst-affected coronavirus state will soon have the nation's most relaxed social-distancing laws, bar the Northern Territory. Health Minister Brad Hazzard said NSW was leading the national fight against the virus. "It's time to get out, time to enjoy yourself, but also it's time to be very, very cautious, because the virus is still amongst us," he said. Mr Hazzard said people going to restaurants should be "washing your hands like you've never done before". The Premier will not direct police to count the number of patrons at each location. Her Government is still working with the hospitality industry to "fine-tune" the new regulations. She said any venue found in breach would be closed down. One idea, suggested by Mr Hazzard, was for all patrons at a venue to provide their name and phone number on entry, to make contact tracing infections easier. NSW Treasurer Dominic Perrottet said there were 280,000 people who applied JobKeeper nationally who worked in the hospitality sector. He said cafes, restaurants and pubs would be central to the state's economic recovery from the virus, and opening them would ensure that when the JobKeeper program ends, people would have paid work. Deputy Premier John Barilaro said the increased cap would be a boon for regional businesses, which were struggling amid the coronavirus lockdown. The changes to restaurant rules will coincide with the same deadline that regional travel will be eased in NSW. "We've opened up the regions and now it's our happy hour, time to wine and dine," Mr Barilaro said. Mr Hazzard said Australia was leading the world in the fight against the virus. "And NSW is leading Australia yet again," he said. 
FGM spikes in Somalia due to coronavirus lockdown but there's a 'worrying' silence in Australia
Women's rights groups fear lockdowns to stem the spread of COVID-19 will see a spike in cases of female genital mutilation (FGM) worldwide, with Australian activists concerned the practice could be on the rise behind closed doors. In Somalia, aid groups have seen an "alarming spike" in demand for FGM services as cutters are going door-to-door during coronavirus lockdowns and school closures, Plan International Australia has warned. The United Nations Population Fund, meanwhile, recently predicted some 2 million extra cases of FGM and 13 million additional child marriages would occur over the next decade due to COVID-19. But in Australia, it's the relative silence that has anti-FGM campaigners worried. WARNING: This story contains graphic descriptions which may disturb some readers. FGM, sometimes called female circumcision, is the partial or total cutting of the clitoris and other external genitalia and in Somalia, the vaginal opening is often sewn up  a procedure called infibulation, the most severe form of FGM. FGM has no health benefits and can leave girls with infections, bleeding, chronic pain and psychological injuries. The procedure can result in death. Sadia Allin said she was alarmed when a woman knocked on her door and offered to cut her daughters, aged just five and nine. Ms Allin, Plan International's head of mission in Somalia, was subjected to genital mutilation when she was a child and is determined that her daughters will not undergo it. "I was shocked," she said. "What was really scary is  my girls are safe with me from FGM  but I was so scared for the girls next door." She said healthcare workers across the country and nurses they partner with reported a spike in requests for FGM to be carried out while daughters were home from school. "Most disturbingly, we have seen an increase in FGM incidents across the country," she said. "The restrictive impact of COVID-19 has forced girls out of school and that has increased their vulnerability to forms of violence in their homes, including FGM." Bring your daughter to "mass circumcision" for $10, a Facebook advertisement in Indonesia's South Sulawesi province reads. In rural areas, female genital mutilation is still in high demand. Ms Allin said FGM is often seen as an essential part of womanhood and a precondition for marriage in Somalia. Somalia's constitution states that the circumcision of girls is "tantamount to torture" and is prohibited, but the country does not have a law against FGM. As coronavirus spreads around the globe, health experts and aid groups fear some of the world's most vulnerable countries in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and the Pacific could become new hotspots for COVID-19. Ms Allin said what was concerning was that some cutters who had given up FGM had now resumed the harmful practice due to the economic crisis spurred by the lockdown. "We are losing the gains we made," she said. "You might say the number [of girls subjected to FGM] in Somalia was already 98 per cent, so what's the difference? The reason for the alarm is the very short period of time. "It has to do with gender inequality  [it sends the message] that girls don't have the right to own their own body. And it impacts everything, from education [to] their ambition for leadership." The African continent has over 95,000 cases of coronavirus and nearly 3,000 deaths, according to the African Centres for Disease Control. In Somalia, there are just over 1,500 cases and 61 deaths, according to the Johns Hopkins University COVID-19 map. African-Australian activist Khadija Gbla said she usually gets half a dozen calls each month from concerned teachers, social workers, or girls themselves at risk of FGM here. But in the past couple of months, she's not had a single one  and "that is the most dangerous thing," she told the ABC. "Nothing. It's been crickets, complete crickets, that is the worrisome part of it," Ms Gbla said. "Kids are stuck at home with parents and can't actually reach for help. The problem is that we won't actually see the damage until this is all over, and then we're going to have a whole range of children who have been cut or mutilated. "The restrictions in place have created a breeding ground for this to take place." A new documentary starts a conversation about the widespread and unregulated practice of female circumcision in Malaysia. In Australia, an estimated 53,000 women have undergone FGM but Ms Gbla said there are 11 girls "at risk" of FGM in Australia each day.  FGM is illegal in Australia and there have been three successful prosecutions against the practice in recent years. Ms Gbla said while trips overseas to countries where FGM is commonplace have stopped due to global travel bans, that was not much comfort for her foundation, The Desert Flower Centre, which is aware of individuals in Australia who will perform FGM for a little as $1,000 or $2,000. "What we know is that people have always found ways around travel and they have found people in Australia who are willing to do it," she said. Olayide Ogunsiji, a senior lecturer at the Western Sydney University school of nursing and midwifery, said she had not heard of any rise in FGM cases here, but was concerned that could be due to a lack of reporting.  Dr Ounsiji feared lockdowns would enable parents to pressure their daughters into undergoing FGM, adding she was concerned about the broader impact of the pandemic on sexual and reproductive health in Australia's migrant and refugee communities. "It's about raising more awareness in this particular time of lockdown that there will be many girls and women that will be trapped into giving their consent to have it done," she said.  The projected global increase, she said, was "shocking, but not surprising".  "The reason I say it's not surprising is because of the closed-door secrecy that surrounds the practice itself," she said.  Khadija Gbla's repressed memory of female genital mutilation would surface during puberty. Being an outsider to a 'clitero-centric' culture, was a decision made for her. Ms Gbla added that seeking help for women abroad at this time was made more difficult due to shutdowns, citing a case where a woman in Turkey had reached out to her  the woman had been subjected to FGM and the mutilation had made urinating and menstruating unbearably painful. That was three weeks ago and Ms Gbla said she has been unable to connect with medical services on the ground there. "There's always been a silence around it, given it's such a cultural practice, and then you add COVID-19 into the mix, so kids are not having access to services  shelter and support," she said. "We are sitting ducks with our hands tied, waiting to deal with the carnage post-COVID, when the restrictions are lifted. Because we will have a carnage on our hands." The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women Marise Payne has been approached for comment. 
Former White House butler Wilson Roosevelt Jerman, who served 11 US presidents over 55 years, dies from coronavirus
A former White House butler who served 11 US presidents over more than five decades has died at the age of 91 from coronavirus. Wilson Roosevelt Jerman succumbed to COVID-19, prompting glowing tributes from former first families. More than 95,000 Americans have died from coronavirus since February, with more than 1.61 million confirmed cases across the US. Mr Jerman's career began in 1957 with the Dwight Eisenhower administration and ended under Barack Obama in 2012. He performed a variety of roles during 55 years at the White House, including cleaner, lift operator, butler and maitre d'. "With his kindness and care, Wilson Jerman helped make the White House a home for decades of first families, including ours," said former first lady Michelle Obama.  "His service to others  his willingness to go above and beyond for the country he loved and all those whose lives he touched  is a legacy worthy of his generous spirit." Mr Jerman was promoted from cleaner to butler during the presidency of John Kennedy when first lady Jackie Kennedy noticed his professionalism. "[Jackie Kennedy] was instrumental in ensuring that that happened," his granddaughter Jamila Garrett told Fox 5 in Washington. Former president George W Bush and first lady Laura Bush said that Mr Jerman was a "lovely man." "He was the first person we saw in the morning when we left the residence and the last person we saw each night when we returned," the Bushes said in a statement. Hillary Clinton remembered Mr Jerman as a White House employee who added a human touch to his daily duties. "Bill and I were saddened to hear of the passing of Wilson Roosevelt Jerman at the age of 91 from COVID-19," she tweeted. "Jerman served as a White House butler across 11 presidencies and made generations of first families feel at home, including ours." During more than half a century in the White House, Mr Jerman witnessed many changes in US race relations, culminating in Mr Obama becoming the first black president in 2008. Ohio State University's Koritha Mitchell, author of From Slave Cabins to the White House, said that Mr Jerman was seen as an important figure in the history of African Americans in US political life. "That must have felt like a victory," Ms Mitchell said of Mr Jerman's time in the Obama White House. When he left his position in 2012 at the age of 83, Mr Jerman was honoured by Mr Obama with a series of plaques, for each of the 11 presidents he had served. When Mr Jerman began his White House career in 1957, the first frisbee had just been sold in US stores, Robert Menzies was Australian Prime Minister and the Asian Flu pandemic was claiming over 150,000 lives worldwide. ABC/Wires 
What happens behind the scenes producing the ABC Coronavirus Australia live news blog
During a frantic shift curating rapidly unfolding news on the coronavirus crisis, sourcing information for inquiring readers and dishing up some occasional light relief with an amusing GIF, ABC News blogger Sophie Meixner came across a particularly curly question. Barbara wanted to know if she could continue to employ her 'gorgeous pool boy'? "We get a lot of questions asking: 'Can I do [specific activity] in [specific state or territory]' but I wasn't expecting Barbara's particular conundrum," recalls Sophie Meixner. "I saw the comment come in and read it out loud to Simon Smale, who was blogging with me. "We both chuckled, I threw it in the blog along with a couple of lines and didn't think anything of it. "A few people posted the screenshot on Twitter and it escalated from there. "I give all credit to Barbara who asked the most perfect and hilarious question that I only supplemented with my response." While Meixner's deft handling brought some laughs (as well as clarifying whether tradespeople were allowed to visit homes) she and her fellow bloggers take great care to ensure they're striking the right tone, given the devastating scale and impact of COVID-19. "First and foremost, the vast majority of the blog is for posting breaking news and making the current situation clearer for our audience  though we do try to write it in a more conversational and accessible way than some other news stories," Meixner says. "With the more flippant parts of the coronavirus blog, like 'feuds' between bloggers, occasional GIFs, and funny audience questions, I have certainly grappled with making sure I don't ever lose sense of the gravity of the situation and the fact that many people are deeply affected. "That said, the clear majority of our commenters indicate to us that we are striking the right balance between news coverage and the occasional moment of levity, reminding them there can still be humour and silliness in the world." Live blogs are usually launched around big breaking news events to provide rolling coverage of an unfolding story and compliment more traditional news articles, explainers and analysis, but they've also been an important part of ABC News coverage of elections, sport and big entertainment events, such as the Oscars and Eurovision. "Blogging allows us to get the key points to the audience as things happen, in real time," says Simon Smale. "I've been involved in blogging the summer bushfires, Queensland floods and the Christchurch massacre. "It's obvious that those events require a very different style of blogging, where we deliver concise, clear information in a sensitive way. "Meanwhile, when I've been covering Test cricket with the sport team, the coverage tends to be much more frivolous, with GIFS, jokes and a really large amount of audience interaction. "With the coronavirus blog, I've found that the tone that works best is somewhere between the two, a happy medium between delivering the news and keeping things entertaining." The audience interaction in a blog also helps inform how a story or news event is covered. "The added bonus of a live blog is that it gives us an opportunity to see what people are asking about that topic in real time and, particularly during coronavirus, gives us an opportunity to help people find out information," Smale says. "We're able to have those two-way discussions with readers and, to an extent, let them drive the coverage." "Blog readers are necessarily very switched on to the news because they are already across the broad picture and are coming to the blog for minute-by-minute updates," Meixner says. "In that way they often give us insightful and very funny commentary, as well as ask really challenging questions that are well-informed by context and often that nobody else has considered. "So, audience interaction truly enhances the quality of the blog. "There are two moments that stand out to me. "The first was on March 13 when the Government raised the SmartTraveller alert for the whole world to a Level 3 'do not travel'. "The second was on March 29 when Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced the 10-person gathering rule was being cut to a two-person rule. "Both of those moments felt so surreal for me and it was the questions to the blog that made me realise exactly how much each announcement would impact on people's daily lives. "We were able to form a list of common audience questions and seek answers both for blog posts and future stories and in that way, the audience interaction on the blog really shaped our coverage." The coronavirus blog is one of ABC News's longest-running live blogs, clocking up 70 days in a row (at time of writing) since March 14 and sometimes open from 5am to past midnight on a day with lots of developments. There are often two bloggers rostered on at the same time  one focused on breaking news while the other answers audience questions. "It's always a bit of a juggling act with the blog," Meixner says. "If it's a day when the National Cabinet is due to meet we know ahead of time that it's going to be a big one  not only for breaking news, but also in the hours following the press conference when people are going to be looking to the website for an explanation of the announcements made and how they will affect their lives. "But then some days we expect it's going to be quieter and then something huge happens nationally or internationally. "The resources I'm constantly monitoring throughout the shift  aside from questions coming into the blog  are the international and Australian wire services, Twitter and email, the Just In feed on the ABC News website, the ABC News Channel on TV and a service that transcribes it called Tveeder, a constantly updated domestic stats list we use internally, and each state or territory's health website and social media feeds. "From there, information just comes at us and it's our job to present it in a prioritised and coherent way." The bloggers regularly receive more than 300 questions per shift  on the busiest days when wide-ranging restrictions were announced the number topped 1,000  and do their best to answer as many as possible. "Another funny question I had was a woman who asked whether social distancing restrictions allowed her to still have sex," Meixner says. "I answered it in a way I thought was reasonable and in line with government advice (so far as it had been given). "As a 20-something, I had a lot of friends message me after that post saying they were wondering the exact same thing. "It highlighted how surreal this entire situation is and how many aspects of life have been affected." Meixner said some distressing questions and comments have stayed with her, often from people kept apart from loved ones. "A boyfriend and girlfriend who desperately wanted to see each other but don't live together and decided to stay apart for the noble sake of flattening the curve," she said. "A grandma who is used to seeing her grandkids multiple times a week and now hasn't seen them for more than a month. "A woman struggling with her mental health who's not able to drive interstate to stay with her sister, who wants to care for her." As well as asking questions about the pandemic, the audience has become curious about the bloggers themselves and possible tension in the ranks! "In the early days of this blogging marathon, a few audience members speculated that there might be rivalries on the blog, or a so-called blogging beef," Smale says. "We got so many questions asking why Bridget (Judd) and I didn't get on (we do  I think!) or who each blogger had an issue with. "The great thing about this blog is that there have been about eight different people running it, all with different personalities and styles, which really come out over the course of a seven-and-a-half-hour shift. "I think the audience appreciates that we have different styles  and they clearly have their favourites (Bridget and Sophie being the two people we get asked about a lot). "The interaction we do get with the audience is overwhelmingly positive. "People often just leave a comment saying hi or good morning (or to ask where Sophie or Bridget are) as well as questions about what's going on in the office. "I really enjoy getting comments that I can reply to in a funny way, particularly if people have picked up a thread from a previous day." Some regular commenters even say they don't know where they'll get their fix of drama once the blog stops, and with it the blogging beef. "I hate to spoil people's blogging enjoyment but none of us are feuding with each other and in fact we work in a fairly uneventful, harmonious office," Meixner says. "But on the blog, we have fallen into these fictional alliances which are just too entertaining not to continue. "According to the blog canon, Simon and Bridget are in an active feud, and Peter (Marsh) and I also have beef." And while the audience familiarity has made for engaging and entertaining reading it's been a weird experience for the bloggers. "It's truly odd and often very flattering," Meixner says. "There are people who comment under the name #1 Sophie Fan or Team Sophie. "The blog readers are avid and intelligent news consumers whose insights I really respect. "We online journos definitely aren't like the personalities you sometimes encounter on TV and radio, we're more bookish and less extroverted. "I'm quite happy to go back to being a more-or-less-faceless ABC reporter after this." While the blog style mightn't be everyone's cup of tea, it's attracted a strong audience with more than 42 million page views.  Helping people make sense of a difficult, stressful and uncertain time  and sometimes putting a smile on their face  has been hugely rewarding for the bloggers. "One thing I enjoy most is answering a question for someone who is clearly confused, or just plain concerned about a particular topic, and being able to point them in the direction of an article that one of our journalists has written on that topic," Smale says. "When the person gets back to you and says how helpful that was, that's a good feeling." "Blogging doesn't work for everyone, but it has worked for a lot of people during the coronavirus pandemic," Meixner says. "It certainly doesn't replace the more traditional forms of journalism, which I also love doing, but simply enhances them. "It's a platform we are constantly refining, but I believe it has provided information, clarity and even hope to many Australians as we all go through this surreal event together." Read more stories about how we produce the news on ABC Backstory. 
Amidst coronavirus chaos, Donald Trump wages war on US Government watchdogs
The US President claims he's been taking a controversial, unproven, potentially dangerous drug in an attempt to ward off the coronavirus. The President threatens to "hold up" federal funding for a state that's suffering a massive flood, all because it sent out applications for mail-in voting to reduce exposure to coronavirus. The President calls a Chinese Government spokesman a "dope" and a "wacko" at a time of near unprecedented tensions between the world's two superpowers. The President's son posts an Instagram meme that suggests Donald Trump's political opponent is a paedophile. A week is a long time for a reporter covering the Trump administration. Distractions and outrage are the only constants, even (or especially) during a pandemic. But here's a thing that may have slipped your attention: Trump has purged five internal watchdogs in the space of six weeks. It's hard to think of a time in living memory when independent oversight was more important for America. Impropriety and incompetence are everywhere you look. The Trump administration and state governors are under intense scrutiny over their failure to act swiftly and effectively during the crucial early stages of the pandemic, which modelling suggests cost at least 36,000 lives. To cope with the economic collapse, the Federal Government has already borrowed $US3 trillion ($4.5 trillion) from the nation's children and grandchildren, with more eye-popping stimulus on the way. And already there have been problems. At least $US1.5 billion, intended to help small businesses struggling with the coronavirus, was snaffled up by publicly listed companies, which were given preferential treatment to apply by banks which collected larger processing fees as a result. And then there's the seizure of Republican Senate intelligence committee chair Richard Burr's phone in an FBI investigation into his dumping of $US1.7 million worth of stocks before the markets tumbled. Fury over a $US700 billion taxpayer bailout for "too-big-to-fail" companies after the 2008 financial crisis, which funded lavish bonuses for bankers and traders, helped spawn the Tea Party movement, which in part led to Trump's election. Who knows where this latest, much bigger, round of murky stimulus will lead in the years to come. Right now, we don't even have a good mechanism for understanding whether fraud is being committed on a grand scale. As part of the latest stimulus legislation, an oversight board was established with broad scope to sniff out "fraud, waste, abuse and mismanagement". Named the Pandemic Response Accountability Committee (PRAC), its membership includes inspectors-general, who were tasked with alerting the public about anything improper in the public health and economic response to the crisis. In the past few weeks, three of the committee's watchdogs have been fired: Mitch Behm from the Transportation Department, Christi Grimm of the Department of Health and Human Services and the Pentagon's Glenn Fine. Behm was investigating a possible conflict of interest; Grimm had reported severe shortages of medical supplies in hospitals; Fine was heading the group overseeing the massive stimulus package. Trump claimed he had to act after receiving "reports of bias". "We have a lot of IGs from the Obama era," he said on Tuesday. Former Justice Department inspector-general Michael Bromwich told Reuters it was akin to "a reign of terror" unleashed on the IG community at a time when they're more needed than ever. "That is bad for everyone, but it's worse for the public," he said. And yet, the sacking of these three inspectors-general are not even the most controversial. State Department inspector-general Steve Linick had been investigating several matters involving the department head, Mike Pompeo. The Secretary of State had been accused of misusing taxpayer-funded staff by directing them to pick up his dry-cleaning and walk the family dog, Sherman. It's a relatively trivial, but potentially embarrassing, allegation. But Linick was also looking into a much more serious matter: whether the Trump administration had unlawfully declared an "emergency" last year that enabled Pompeo to bypass a congressional ban on selling weapons to Saudi Arabia. The declaration was made in the aftermath of the murder of journalist Jamal Khashoggi at a time when Riyadh was dropping American bombs on Yemen, contributing greatly to the world's worst humanitarian crisis. Trump claimed he'd never even heard of the inspector-general. So why did he sack him? "I was asked to by the State Department, by Mike [Pompeo]," he said when pressed this week. The Secretary of State, under investigation on several fronts, simply asked the President to sack the man leading the inquiries and it was done. Pompeo has said he didn't know he was under investigation, claiming Linick had to go because he wasn't "performing a function" that was "additive" to the state department. Others claim it was because of unauthorised disclosures, or leaks. The fact that the fifth sacking, a few weeks ago, surprised no-one, doesn't make it any less disturbing. Michael Atkinson was the intelligence community inspector-general who lit the spark that ended in the President's impeachment and ultimate acquittal in the Senate. Atkinson was just carrying out his duty, as the law required, to report the Ukraine whistleblower complaint to congress. Trump saw it as unacceptable disloyalty. Only one Republican has spoken out strongly against the President's purge. He's the same sole Republican who voted in favour of impeaching Trump. "The firings of multiple inspectors-general is unprecedented; doing so without good cause chills the independence essential to their purpose," wrote senator Mitt Romney on Twitter. "It is a threat to accountable democracy and a fissure in the constitutional balance of power." The President has every right to remove an inspector-general for any reason whatsoever. No doubt, there may be some bias among the crop appointed by Barack Obama. But presidents usually grit their teeth and bear it, in the knowledge that every administration will cop criticism in the name of accountability, with voters making the final call. In 1981, president Ronald Reagan moved to fire IGs installed by his Democratic predecessor Jimmy Carter, but a political uproar forced him to rehire several of them. Obama fired one IG to great bipartisan backlash, and he never tried it again. We're so immune to the constant uproar under Trump, this "scandal" was easy to miss. But it represents yet another brutal assault on the checks and balances that have helped keep the US Government accountable to its employer: the taxpayer. There will be a time when Trump is no longer president. But his legacy is already carved in stone. It'll take a bold, scrupulous and popular president to resist copying the Trump playbook to avoid hard-edged scrutiny. 
Coronavirus inquiry tensions leave WA farmers fearing more China tariffs after barley hit
Watching China slap an 80 per cent tariff on Australian barley this week has made West Australian farmers nervous about whether there is more trade pain to come, according to WA Farmers Federation chief executive Trevor Whittington. "Grains, wool, wine, horticulture, the seafood industry  there's a lot of talk around peak bodies and with producers over what's happened with barley and what potentially is on the horizon," he said. Mr Whittington is also the president of Wines Western Australia, an industry caught up in another Chinese trade stoush 18 months ago. "We've seen this behaviour by China before," he said. "This is probably the new norm in how China will react when it's under pressure for whatever reason, and it'll simply ignore existing trade agreements and good protocols and lean on its importers and speed up or slow down trade activity." Mr Whittington said China's barley tariff was not in the spirit of the China Australia Free Trade Agreement, which came into force in December 2015. "I think China is certainly doing itself a disservice by signing these sorts of agreements and not just with Australia, with many other countries and regions around the world and then blatantly ignoring them," he said. "So how this possibly helps China in the long term, it's only a question that they can answer. "But the [agriculture] industry will get on with it and identify other markets and spread its risk." University of Western Australia China expert Jie Chen said Australia's actions would influence whether there were more tariffs to come. "All cards are on the table," he said. "It depends on how Australia conducts itself in the next step in relation to the so-called independent inquiry into coronavirus to be led by the World Health Organisation, and how China will see Australia behave in this international investigation. "Particularly how Australia will collaborate with the United States in pursuing China in relation to the investigation. "I would say both sides have some room to manoeuvre." Dr Chen believed China's decision to impose the barley tariff amid Australia's calls for an independent inquiry into COVID-19 fit a familiar pattern of behaviour. "That China can penalise, can punish you and it can also reward you," he said. In particular, he cited China's 2010 decision to impose import controls on Norwegian salmon in apparent retribution for the Nobel Peace Prize being awarded in Oslo to the Chinese dissident, Liu Xiaobo. Eventually, diplomatic relations between the two countries thawed. Federal Agriculture Minister David Littleproud has already made it clear there would be no retaliation and Australia and China were not engaged in a "trade war". Independent WA-based China researcher Wai Ling Yeung believed China's tariff imposition had a lot to do with how it wanted its own people to see it. "The diplomats from China have been behaving in quite a strange way, I have to say, and there's a name that's been given to that called the 'wolf warrior diplomats'," she said. "Beijing is very eager to control the dialogue and rhetoric that's been going on worldwide concerning the COVID-19 [pandemic]. "From Beijing's point of view, that will have an impact on the governance of the Chinese government and also the sustainability of the Communist Party's governance as well." But Ms Yeung also believed the Federal Government's rejection of China's overtures to join its global infrastructure initiative, the Belt and Road project, was a factor. "Some of the Chinese diplomats in Australia were getting a bit nervous and stressed by the fact that even after trying very, very hard they only managed to get Victoria to promise to sign up," she said. 
Coronavirus restrictions relaxation in SA 'confusing' for many, costly for some businesses
Coronavirus restrictions in South Australia are easing from today and people are feeling more comfortable venturing out of their homes  but instead of celebrations, the changes are causing widespread confusion. Restaurants and cafes can expand their service from today to include indoor dining. While a big topic for many is when they can go to the pub for a drink, it turns out that's not an easy question to answer. Small bars  or at least those with small venue licences  will still not be able to open until June 5 either, despite many not looking that different to restaurants. The confusion has cost Adelaide city wine bar East End Cellars about $5,000, after its operators mistakenly thought it could reopen today under the easing of COVID19 restrictions. East End Cellars had brought in food supplies, printed new menus and extensively cleaned its toilets ahead of a planned relaunch. However, owner Michael Andrewartha said an early morning call from the licensing commissioner changed those plans. "The fine line is that we are a bar, even though there's no bar here or a bar licence, so we had to not open today, which is disappointing for everyone," Mr Andrewartha said. Premier Steven Marshall said the State Government wanted to limit the total number of people flocking back to eat and drink out, as well as the number or patrons in individual venues. "It is confusing and we acknowledge that," he said. "We apologise for that confusion but what we're trying to do is lift the restrictions in an orderly way and keep the coronavirus at bay." Consumer and Business Services said it would let individual venues know they could be in breach of the rules if they were "opening in the mistaken belief they are able to open". Pubs originally intended to reopen indoor dining on Monday, June 8  but health authorities have brought that forward to June 5 so hoteliers can capitalise on the Queen's Birthday long weekend trade.  That is a "common sense" decision, according to Ian Horne from the state branch of the Australian Hotels Association. "It would have been nonsense to start reforms on the last day of a long weekend, so thankfully they've recognised common sense should prevail," he said. The short answer is: we don't know yet. How things will look when pubs and licensed venues reopen on June 5 is not absolutely clear. SA Police Commissioner Grant Stevens said authorities were taking a "principled approach" to restrictions  meaning it won't be a one-size-fits-all ruling.  "Instead of having a blanket rule for every business in South Australia we'll be developing protocols that businesses will have to adopt," he said. "That will enable them to take full advantage of the economic benefits of reopening their businesses." That decision is a relief for some business owners, particularly those with larger venues.  It means that, rather than the previous ruling of only 20 patrons inside, a larger pub with multiple dining areas could be allowed to cater to more people given the bigger floorspace that will allow for social distancing to occur. Going to the pub for a sit-down meal will be allowed from June 5, but depending on the size and layout, the owners will need to consider their obligations once further details are released.  If they deem it to be viable, and they choose to open, patrons should be able to head to their local on June 5 to enjoy a meal with friends. Determining when you can go back just for a drink in the bar is more uncertain  at this stage it looks like only seated dining and drinking will be allowed. "In the first instance we're talking about seated dining within the pubs, but we'll get all of those guidelines," Mr Marshall said.  Some pub owners are disappointed with the news, particularly those who don't serve food, like the Wheatsheaf Hotel in Thebarton. "It won't be viable for us to open under those conditions," said Wheatsheaf owner Jade Flavell.  Restaurants and cafes can now serve 10 people for outdoor dining and 10 people for indoor dining, and the rules have changed to allow the service of alcohol. So, those who have been looking forward to supporting their favourite restaurants  and they've chosen to open  can go as early as today. Police will also resume stationery drug and alcohol testing this weekend. Even though mobile random breath tests have been in operation the whole time, officers are expected to be out in force.  Wallis Cinemas' drive-in cinema at Gepps Cross will reopen next Friday, June 29, but other cinemas will have to wait until June 5. Those wanting to work out at the gym will also have to wait a little longer  but can return from June 5 in some capacity. The guidelines are still being drafted, but you should be prepared to clean equipment before and after use and there may also be restrictions on the number of people allowed in at any one time, depending on the size of the facility.  People wanting to attend indoor exercise classes may also be able to go back from June 5  but, again, details on how it will work are yet to be provided. Some operators may decide it's not viable to start back up if they have to reduce class sizes by too much to allow for social distancing. June 5 is also when beauty and nail salons, massage parlours and tattoo shops can all open, but more details are expected on how many people can be inside at any one time.  You might not get an appointment straight away if the operators can only have limited people inside, and there may be a back log of customers to clear. Spas and saunas remain closed as authorities say there's a higher risk of transmission in those sorts of places. Activities that involve larger gatherings  such as going to the football or a nightclub or food court  will not be resuming any time soon. 
Victoria coronavirus cases rise by 12, including another five linked to Cedar Meats cluster
Victoria has recorded another 12 coronavirus infections, including five linked to an outbreak at the Cedar Meats abattoir. It brings the number of cases linked to the abattoir in Brooklyn, in Melbourne's west, to 111 including 67 staff and 44 close contacts. The rise in cases means Victoria has been responsible for the majority of Australia's reported cases during the past week  53 of 73 cases reported by Friday morning.  Four of the new diagnoses were detected in hotel quarantine and two through community screening programs. The other case is still under investigation. There are 93 active coronavirus cases recorded in Victoria, with 10 people in hospital, including five in intensive care units. The State Opposition said it was increasingly concerned about the growing cluster of cases linked to Cedar Meats and continued to push for an independent investigation. "This cluster gets worse and worse every day," Opposition Leader Michael O'Brien said. While Health Minister Jenny Mikakos earlier said it had been handled "absolutely perfectly", Mr O'Brien said "111 infected people tells you this has been a shambles". Education Minister James Merlino said about 10,000 school staff had been tested as the state prepares to resume face-to-face teaching on Tuesday. "I'm just so pleased that around 10,000 education staff so far have gone and got tested and not one has come back with a positive result," he said. Mr Merlino said health authorities had identified 171 infections which could indicate community transmission, an increase of three since Thursday, out of a total 1,593 positive COVID-19 cases in Victoria. Meanwhile, Victoria Police issued only eight fines to people breaching coronavirus restrictions since 11:00 pm on Sunday, after conducting 3,839 spot checks on homes, businesses and non-essential services. There are only five reasons to leave your home in Victoria  shopping for things you need, accessing medical services or caregiving, attending work or education that cannot be done from home, exercise and some recreational activities, and visiting family and friends. Up to five visitors are allowed at your home and gatherings of up to 10 are allowed outdoors in public for non-contact sport and recreation, but you must maintain 1.5 metres between yourself and others. The State Opposition has criticised the Government's decision toslowlyeaserestrictions, as other states push ahead with opening restaurants and relaxing travel rules. The Melbourne Cricket Club (MCC) has announced it will offer a 30 per cent discount for members, with the president conceding it was "unlikely" fans would be able to watch AFL matches during the 2020 season. The club has about 130,000 members and a further 215,000 on waiting lists, with annual fees for metropolitan-based adults ranging between $360 to $715. Updated Sunday, May 24 Membership grants fans automatic access to most AFL and cricket games at the MCG, as well as a seat in the members' stand. "Our revenue model is dramatically compromised as a result of the crisis and the revenue from managing the ground will not return in any significant form until crowds at games can return," MCC president Michael Happell said. The 30 per cent discount will apply to the club's upcoming 2020/21 season, which begins on September 1. Further discounts would be offered to members who could show they had suffered financial hardship, Mr Happell said. The decision comes as some AFL clubs and Adelaide Oval members have been offered full refunds on 2020 memberships, with the Australian Competition and Consumer Commissionsaying it will "monitor issues relating to sport club membership refunds, credits and ongoing charges". Speaking on ABC Radio Melbourne, MCC chief executive Stuart Fox said the reaction from members to the proposal had been "overwhelmingly positive". While many regard the club and its Members Pavillion as the posh section of the MCG, Mr Fox dismissed suggestions they were "elitist". "They're hard-working Australians, who have joined the club because they love sport," he said. "They're the same as AFL members. They're the same as sporting club members." "Anyone can join the Melbourne Cricket Club. You can put your name down at birth. We don't discriminate, it's access for all. I think it's factually incorrect to call us elitist in any way." The AFL season is set to resume on June 11, however fans will not be permitted at games for the foreseeable future. 
Australia's research ship checking Hobart air quality amid coronavirus shutdown
Tasmanian scientists are collecting data on Hobart's air quality using the CSIRO's research vessel Investigator while the ship is stuck in port due to the coronavirus restrictions. RV Investigator  which has atmospheric instruments to monitor emissions and pollutants  was forced to suspend its operations in March and cancelled five voyages out to sea. CSIRO research scientist Melita Keywood said the instruments were currently running to measure air quality in the Hobart region.  "Wherever the Investigator goes, we can make measurements of the atmosphere, measurements for particles, natural gases and greenhouse gases," she said.  "In Hobart, there are EPA stations that are measuring air quality data to make sure we have good air quality so everyone's health is protected. "There are some gases that we are measuring on the ship that are different from what are usually measured in an air quality station, like carbon dioxide." Ms Keywood said some of the data, such as the presence of gases like ozone, had not been collected in more than 20 years. "That is an air pollutant and is of concern to human health but it's not been measured since the 1990s," she said.  "From the preliminary data, the concentrations are still very low. Particles are bad for human health, but they're not just one thing.  "There are lots of different chemicals and there are lots of different sizes. So we are measuring the size of the particles and the number of small particles." CSIRO technical officer Ian McRobert said having the Investigator docked in Hobart was a unique opportunity.  "The information collected by our instruments tells us about the pollution levels within Hobart and when we're at sea it gives us great background data on global climate," he said.  "We're collecting data on the Hobart air quality throughout the winter and this will contribute to a national study on ultra-fine particle pollution and will also tell us about the profile of pollution created in Hobart during the winter.  Mr McRobert said the pollution within Hobart affected people's health and "there's not great information out there on what those pollution levels are". Science operations manager at the Marine National Facility Matthew Kimber said coronavirus had had a massive impact on the CSIRO and RV Investigator.  "Getting the science party, the researchers from all over the world onto the ship is a really challenging situation with the restrictions in place," he said.  "The other big issue, and as we've seen with cruise ships, is ships in general are really difficult places to manage with the coronavirus. "There's no doubt that we are really going to have to think about how we conduct operations for the foreseeable future." 
Toddler's brain tumour sparks fear patients in coronavirus quarantine won't seek help
Hours before doctors diagnosed 15-month-old Ingrid Newman with a life-threatening brain tumour, her mother agonised over whether to take the toddler to hospital. The pair had travelled from Cooktown to Cairns for medical tests when the toddler suddenly stopped walking early last month.  But when the tests were complete, they had to quarantine for two weeks under police and military guard before they could return home.  The rules apply to anyone wishing to enter Cape York under Federal Government legislation designed to protect vulnerable communities from COVID-19.  Ingrid and her mother, Belle Newman, were 10 days into their quarantine period when the toddler had a sudden violent seizure and started frothing at the mouth.  Ms Newman called a nurse straight away, but said she agonised over whether to break quarantine and send her daughter to hospital.  "I am really glad we did go because otherwise we wouldn't have known about this tumour and it could have gotten much worse," she said.  The family is now in Brisbane, where Ingrid is about to start chemotherapy at the Queensland Children's Hospital.  But the frightening experience has sparked fear other Cape York patients may delay seeking urgent medical help because they don't want to break isolation rules in place under the Biosecurity Act.  "I definitely do believe there are some people that would be putting it off and thinking it might just go away instead of getting help ... because they don't want to be stuck," Ms Newman said.  "I was very reluctant to have to start the two weeks quarantine again."  A Queensland Health spokesman said all public patients, carers and families were screened before going into quarantine to ensure they were fit and ready to complete the two weeks. "We have medical staff available from 8:00am to 10:00pm daily to respond to any medical episodes that might be suffered during quarantine," he said.  "If anyone requires any medical care they will receive it immediately." The spokesman said quarantine requirements were in place to protect First Nations communities from COVID-19.  Since the legislation passed in late March, more than 150 people have completed quarantine in government-funded accommodation in Cairns and returned to their communities on Cape York.  A further 160 are currently undergoing the process.  Ms Newman said being stuck in a hotel apartment with her toddler, unable to go outside, had been extremely difficult.  "One of the things we do to calm my daughter down when she's having a meltdown is we go outside and touch the trees," she said.  "I just couldn't do that, and of course she was being very agitated by this thing growing in her head." Other families have spoken about the mental health implications of having to quarantine in hotel apartments after childbirth. They've asked to be allowed to fly home and quarantine for two weeks when there.  A Queensland Health spokesman asked for understanding from patients and their families during "exceptional times".  "We regret any temporary and short-term inconvenience experienced by individuals and families required to comply with mandatory Commonwealth biosecurity quarantine requirements prior to returning to their Cape York or Torres Strait communities," he said.  "All people undergoing quarantine ... are accommodated in fully serviced apartments with individual kitchens and other facilities.  "They receive meals delivered to their doors three times a day and can also order additional items though reception. "They are also able to order in Uber eats, have supermarket deliveries made, or have friends and family members drop off supplies and other items for them if required.  "We recognise the concerns of patients and their families about the process, but we ask for their understanding on the need to manage their return safely and with the minimum of risk to their communities." Next week, 15-month-old Ingrid will start six weeks of chemotherapy to reduce the size of her brain tumour so that it can be removed.  Ms Newman, who's 26 weeks' pregnant with her second child, said she was grateful for the support she'd received from Queensland Health.  "In a way it was good we were in Cairns (and not Cooktown), because the help was on our doorstep," she said.  A shunt in Ingrid's head is now relieving pressure from the tumour. "It's been very overwhelming but she's such a little fighter," Ms Newman said.  "She's starting to be able to walk again and move around without any pain, and she's back to her normal, happy, cheeky self. "How she's been improving since they put the shunt in is giving us all a lot of hope." 
NSW coronavirus death toll climbs, bringing Australia's total to 101, as Government urges more testing
The NSW coronavirus death toll has climbed to 50 following the death of an 80-year-old Sydney woman, bringing Australia's total to 101. NSW chief health officer Kerry Chant said the woman died from the virus last night in Sydney's Concord Hospital. Dr Chant said the woman was exposed to the virus when she attended an outpatient clinic at the hospital but there was no ongoing risk of transmission at the facility. There were three new coronavirus infections in the state yesterday, bringing the state's total to 3,084. All three cases are still under investigation but health authorities said they were not linked and were working to determine if they had been acquired in three different areas of Sydney. A total of 8,611 people were tested for COVID-19 in the 24 hours to 8:00pm yesterday. Dr Chant said the state had a high rate of testing, with more than 400,000 people swabbed since the pandemic began. "One negative test does not mean you are not going to get COVID-19," she said. She urged people to get tested multiple times, if they felt unwell. "We are going to need you to re-engage with testing ... every time you have new respiratory symptoms, you do need another test," she said. "That's particularly important as we come through to the winter season where we might see an upswing in other respiratory infections." Dr Chant also emphasised there was no room for delays in coming forward for testing and people shouldn't take the approach of "oh I'll just see how my sore throat develops". 
Foodies begin booking out Melbourne restaurants ahead of coronavirus restrictions easing
The phones are ringing hot at popular Melbourne restaurants, pubs and cafes, as eager customers try to book the first available tables when Victoria's coronavirus restrictions ease on June 1. Hospitality venues were forced to close their doors or operate as takeaway businesses in March but, under the new rules, will be able to cater for up to 20 customers at a time. Ben Anderson, the Victorian manager of the Australian Venue Company, said all 31 of its businesses would reopen on June 1 although bookings would be limited to two-hour sessions. "People are trying to ring for groups of 10 or 20. We're getting lots of calls through our reservations line," he said. A similar rush also occurred in Sydney this month when restrictions were eased in NSW, with some restaurants reportedly booked out in an hour. Staff at the Auburn Hotel in Melbourne's inner east have been spending the week setting up equipment, furniture and glassware ahead of the long-awaited return of customers on June 1. With the venue normally popular throughout the week, manager Heather Eiswirth said calls began flooding in when the State Government flagged the reopening of restaurants on May 17. "As soon as the Government eased the restrictions we immediately got phone calls for people to book," she said. "I think everyone misses the pub environment." As stipulated by state regulations, every customer's name, contact number, and address will be recorded on a database that could be accessed by health authorities. Due to the reduced capacity, South Melbourne cafe St Ali will use black theatre curtains to artificially shrink its venue to give customers the impression that things are busy inside. Owner Salvatore Malatesta said he had received "over 100 inquiries" from people wanting to book tables. "We've got regulars who've been coming for 15 years. A dozen or slightly more come every day, seven days a week at the same time. Those guys are texting me saying 'Make sure my table is available'," Mr Malatesta said. While he was pleased to be reopening his doors, Mr Malatesta was concerned many hospitality businesses would struggle to stay afloat when the Federal Government's JopKeeper payments end in October. "I'm remaining pretty positive because the alternative is terminal," he said. "There is no other description other than to say the pandemic has decimated hospitality." The Victorian Government released some details of its plan to gradually reopen venues on May 17, and is due to announce more specifics about the rules on Monday. From June 1, up to 20 patrons will be allowed in an "enclosed space" provided venues can ensure there is enough space for one person per four square metres. The Government hopes to be able to allow up to 50 patrons from June 22, with up to 100 permitted during the second half of July. "Increased hygiene measures" for staff and patrons will also be required. Food critic and writer Dani Valent said there was also confusion in the industry about a condition that stated alcohol could only be served with a "genuine meal". Exactly what a genuine meal was  and whether it included smaller dishes like tapas, dumplings and bowls of chips  remained unclear. "It's going to be a mad scramble between May 25 and June 1 to get up to speed," she said. "It's also not clear what an enclosed space is and we don't know about outdoor areas." Ms Eiswirth agreed, and hoped the rules would allow larger venues like hers to be sectioned off into several enclosed spaces so they could operate with a higher capacity. Victoria Police will conduct checks to ensure compliance, and they will have the power to issue on-the-spot fines of up to $9,913 for breaches. The co-owner of CBD Italian restaurant Tipo 00, Andrea Papadakis, said he was "excited" to be reopening his doors on June 1, but said he would not be taking bookings for the time being. The restaurant's takeaway service would also continue when dining resumed. "We don't want to create queues," Mr Papadakis said. "I don't think it'll be as hectic as many people think. People are still happy to stay back and see what's going to happen. "We'll try to break even at the moment but it will be great for our staff. "It will open up more shifts for our staff who have been waiting at home." 
As coronavirus restrictions ease, these seniors revel in regained freedom
As COVID-19 lockdowns are gradually lifted across the nation, Australians are enthusiastically resuming many of their favourite hobbies. But for seniors, statistically considered more vulnerable to coronavirus, easing into the "new normal" comes with added risk. Five seniors spoke to the ABC about their feelings as restrictions lift, pubs fill with patrons and swimming pools reopen. At 90, Nita McAuley has been delighted to rejoin her Darwin Stingers Masters Swimming Club mates when they resumed training at the Parap Pool this week, but she could have waited longer. "I think we should have stayed locked down a bit longer and made sure that we're all well, but people get impatient. I'm not impatient, I can't afford to be," she said. Ms McAuley doesn't feel the need to limit her movement or activities but says that's only because people arriving in the NT still have to quarantine for two weeks in a hotel. "We're very lucky to be in Darwin, we haven't experienced all the terrible things that are happening down south, and I think we should keep it that way a bit longer until we're sure of what's happening in other states," she said. But other club members including Anne Walker said they would keep self-imposing limits on how many people they gathered with and how they moved about, beyond the official rules. "I won't be getting into any large groups any time soon, I am only mixing with three or four people," she said. Ms Walker also said her feeling of relative safety would disappear if the Territory's border restrictions were removed while there was still community transmission of COVID-19 in other states. On Darwin's Fannie Bay bowling green, Christine Paynter is relishing being able to gather with the members of her seniors team now the lockdown has been lifted. "I didn't like it at all because I'm a social butterfly, I like to be out and about and I've missed my bowls really badly," she said. The retired nurse said she was happy to move freely around Darwin as long as the Territory's border quarantine rules remained.  During the lockdown, she had to remain out in the community, doing essential shopping for her daughter's family, who quarantined at home for two weeks after her baby grandson came home from emergency surgery in Brisbane. "That was pretty traumatic. I just had to hand the shopping over the fence, so I also isolated myself as much as I could," she said. Larrakia elder and community leader Kathy Mills, 84, said what upset her most during the lockdown was feeling it wasn't safe to see her great-grandchildren at her home in Palmerston. "I'm very close to my grandchildren, and it has hurt me not to be with them, and then when they've come I've been nervous about touching them," she said. "It wasn't that I was scared about catching the virus, but because of my age and because I was vulnerable it made me feel worried that I might pass it on." Ms Mills hopes missing family and society has encouraged people to value those as much more important. Although she has cerebral palsy, Robyn Burridge said she hasn't felt more vulnerable than other people in the community, but she listened to medical friends who ordered her to stay at home as much as possible. She said she missed having friends to visit, as well as being able to attend a ceremony to receive an OAM for her disability sector advocacy work. But she has also found the pandemic "a great leveller". "It's been wonderful that everything has moved a lot slower, people have moved a lot slower," she said. "People avoid wheelchairs anyway, they stand away from them, so isolation wasn't a problem. Just generally I feel we've been much more easily accepted." Although she continued to shop for essentials during the lockdown, last week she made her first outing back to Darwin's foreshore in six weeks. "I didn't think freedom was so important but to just feel that lovely breeze going through your hair, and the cool crystal water, it was just absolutely beautiful," she said. She hopes that despite regaining freedom, the community will remember what it is like to move more slowly and reflect on how lucky the Territory has been to have so few virus cases. "It's not over yet, by a long shot, so we can't afford to be complacent. So I just hope that our borders stay shut for quite some time to come." 
Coronavirus restrictions could mean more risk-taking on our roads, but ACT police warn 'someone's luck will run out'
On Monday, ACT police gave a press conference expressing their frustration at Canberra's recent driving record. There had been a significant spike in road-related incidents, including one in which two drivers were caught travelling at more than 150kph on Parkes Way and another in which a 19-year-old driver wedged their car into a Kambah home at 3:00am. Three major incidents occurred on Sunday and four on Monday in the space of an hour, Officer in Charge of Road Policing, Detective Station Sergeant Marcus Boorman said. Detective Boorman said police had been seeing the rate of driving offences go up with each passing day. "We're catching people speeding, drink driving, drug driving, using their phones, and ignoring red lights on a daily basis, yet every day we're catching more people doing it," he said. He said officers were baffled by the rapid rise, considering there were far fewer drivers on the road than there were before the pandemic brought society to a halt. Detective Boorman said ACT Policing's fear was that the risk-taking behaviour would only get worse, with fines and infringements currently not having their usual effect. "I really don't know where to start in relation to our frustration with what we're seeing out there," he said. "I don't know what's causing this driver behaviour, but I do know what the effect will be, someone's luck will run out and we'll have a person, or people killed." But among psychologists, there are a few reasons that spring to mind to account for the spike in risk-taking, and they are related to the devastating ripple-effect of COVID-19. Each of us has a level of risk with which we are generally comfortable, according to ANU Professor of Psychology Michael Smithson. And when some risk in our life is mitigated, it can be a natural response to then bring in new risks to essentially level things out. That could mean going for an unusually long run and then allowing oneself to eat a special treat later as a kind of reward, effectively levelling out the relationship between risk and safety we are taking with our health. In the case of people speeding or driving under the influence, Dr Smithson said there could be a correlation with the effects of social distancing rules. "They might in a sense feel constrained, or like their freedoms have been denied in one area, so they might be compensating for that," Dr Smithson said. Early data suggesting Australians were drinking more in social isolation also fitted with that idea, he said. "People are maintaining social distancing, staying at home and so on, and when people are behaving in a more morally upright and correct fashion than they're accustomed to, that gives them license to be a little more rotten at something else," Dr Smithson said. "So they'll say, 'maybe I'll have that extra glass of wine, maybe I'll binge watch that series', and that could explain some of that risky driving." ANU College of Law Associate Professor Kath Hall said while it was not possible to know for sure why there had been a spike in driving incidents, risk-taking was often associated with heightened stress in a person's life. She said it was likely the pandemic was taking an enormous toll on people's mental health, not just in terms of uncertainty around work and other significant factors, but also in the way it had confined them. "The more that people's stress levels increase, with thoughts of their health or death, the more prone we are to respond to those stresses with drinking or drug-taking," Dr Hall said. "I think it is interesting that these driving behaviours happened straight after social distancing restrictions." In the ACT, social distancing restrictions eased overnight on Friday, allowing 10 people to dine-in at a cafe or restaurant, while liberties were also extended in relation to public spaces. Saturday night was the first evening people might have felt some license to let loose a little since the pandemic began. "There are a couple of things going on when we have less control over our life, our movements, our decisions, so that where we can, we can try to claim back some control over the things we can do," Dr Hall said. She said the pandemic  bringing with it the threat of thousands of deaths and economic turmoil  could also have altered people's perceptions of what constituted a "serious risk". Speeding or driving under the influence could actually seem like a lesser crime than it would under normal circumstances, she said. In fact, the pandemic's death toll  and subsequent reporting of those statistics  could be having the opposite effect on people than what is intended. Researchers at the University of Stirling recently reported that there was evidence people became more comfortable with taking risks after hearing reports of high numbers of deaths. "The logic is that risk-taking can be a source of self-esteem and one common way of coping with the inescapable threat of death is to bolster our self-esteem," the researchers said. "In short, when you encounter news that hundreds of people, just like your neighbours, have died in the past day, there are consequences for your judgement and decision-making. "You are unlikely to be conscious of some of these consequences and, contrary to what the media and officials would wish, they might make you sensitive to the risks that we now face." But researchers said while people were perhaps having an adverse effect to bad news around the world, stories of heroism had another impact, encouraging people to think more positively. "Heroes typically embody the traits that we would like to see continue into future generations, and so relating thoughts of death to heroism can serve as a buffer against existential concerns," they wrote. The effects of coronavirus are only just starting to be collated and investigated by science, but there is strong evidence to suggest the pandemic is already having significant impacts on our behaviour. Without the luxury of time on their side, ACT Policing could only beg the public to use common sense as coronavirus restrictions ease and society begins to enjoy certain freedoms after months of confinement. 
China's annual Congress underway after coronavirus forces two month delay
Thousands of political delegates are gathering in Beijing for China's annual parliamentary-style political Congress  in a showcase the ruling Communist Party hopes will highlight a triumph over coronavirus.  The mass gathering is being portrayed in China as a display of the country's strength in largely containing the virus domestically. It's also a chance to reset the focus on reviving the world's second largest economy. But with more than 50 cases publicly reported in the past two days despite some of the world's toughest monitoring measures, authorities here are taking many measures to minimise the risk of President Xi Jinping being exposed to the virus. At the opening of a less important advisory meeting on Thursday, nearly everyone in the Great Hall of the People wore masks. But Mr Xi and the other members of the top Politburo Standing Committee didn't wear masks. Not all of the 3,000 delegates will be attending in person. Those that are there have had to undergo hotel quarantine. Diplomats that would usually observe the opening work report by Premier Li Keqiang are only permitted in the Great Hall if they undergo COVID testing and isolation at a state guesthouse. Many are therefore not attending, including Australia's Ambassador to China Graham Fletcher. Journalists  who have long faced access barriers to those in power in China  now have an extra layer of distance. While some will be allowed in after undergoing testing, the vast majority of reporters are barred from the Congress venue and are restricted to asking (often pre-selected) questions to delegates via video link from a media centre in a different part of Beijing. "The Congress has both a symbolic and practical significance this year", said Beijing-based independent political commentator Wu Qiang. "Authorities couldn't indefinitely postpone it as they need to show they won the battle against the virus over the past few months." The biggest change is that the normal 10-day program of provincial sessions and working groups has been whittled down to about a week. While the ceremony for the opening is likely to be dialled down in an emptier hall, there are many familiar aspects about this year's event. In the lead up, the usual small army of retirees appeared on the streets clad in red armbands. The neighbourhood watch volunteers are part of a heavy-handed security effort in central Beijing each year designed to ensure nothing goes wrong. "I think Chairman Xi's good health is our biggest wish  he's our leader and guides our country", said one of the retired volunteers who declined to give his name to the ABC. "He must not fall ill." While the Congress is widely viewed outside China as a rubber stamp parliament that approves decisions largely made by the Communist Party's leadership, it does set the economic agenda for the year ahead. Usually the second-ranked leader Premier Li Keqiang would announce a GDP growth target range to signal how much China's Government will spend. Last year, it was 6-6.5 per cent. This year, with China's economy suffering an unprecedented first quarter official growth rate of minus 6.8 per cent (and some analysts suspecting it was even worse), it's not clear if he will announce a target. "I don't think Premier Li will set up a definite GDP growth target for this year. It's not necessary", said Xiang Songzuo, an economics professor. "From my observation, in the second half of this year, China's economy will have a positive growth rate, maybe 3 to 4 per cent, and overall for 2020, maybe it will be 1 per cent or 2." Some others have suggested failing to declare a growth target would hurt confidence about China's ability to bounce back quickly from the crisis. Most commentators expect the government will use fiscal and monetary tools to try to get the economy chugging again, even though options are considerably more limited now than when Beijing spent $US575 billion ($873 billion) worth of stimulus during the 2008 Global Financial Crisis. Alleviating spiralling unemployment appears to be the main focus, with few factories in China's southern manufacturing heartland running at capacity amid an export slump. "I expect Premier Li to launch more infrastructure investments", said Professor Xiang. If so, it could reassure Australian coal and iron ore exporters  who are jittery over reports that some power plants have been ordered to suspend Australian coking coal imports to protect local producers. Revised iron ore inspection procedures have also raised concerns, having been announced just days after new barley tariffs and bans on some Australian beef imports  which Chinese authorities have only half-heartedly claimed are not linked to strained diplomatic ties. A China Iron Ore Association spokesman told the ABC the new customs inspection measures were aimed at streamlining imports, not holding them up. 
No cap on commuter numbers on Queensland public transport despite coronavirus concerns over physical distancing limitations
With all Queensland students returning to the classroom on Monday, the public transport network in the state's south-east is set to face a key coronavirus physical-distancing test. In New South Wales, the State Government announced maximum numbers of passengers on buses and trains. However, Queensland Transport Minister Mark Bailey said there was currently no need to introduce capacity limits and commuters needed to use "common sense". Mr Bailey said patronage on public transport had plummeted by 77 per cent during the pandemic, and even with school returning in full, social distancing was not a problem. "There is no issue at the moment in terms of social distancing  there is a lot of space there for people," Mr Bailey said. "[Quotas] is not something that we believe is necessary at this point, and the risk in Queensland is considerably lower than New South Wales where community transmission is much more common. "We're cognisant of the fact that when schools go back fully next week there will be an increase in passengers, but again, people are not going to just go back to how they worked before." University of Queensland virologist Ian Mackay said Queensland appeared to be keeping the situation under control, and while children could be infected with COVID-19, they seemed to be affected less severely. "The experiment goes on with us returning back to normal, as much as we can, while keeping that physical distance," Associate Professor Mackay said.  Patronage levels will be monitored.(Supplied: Queensland Government) Authorities said cleaning on public transport vehicles had increased in response to coronavirus. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Passengers are not allowed to use cash to buy a ticket and bus commuters must board via the rear door. "[We're also] ensuring [passengers] are aware of how to socially distance and those communications will increase in coming days," Mr Bailey said. Transport Workers Union (TWU) Queensland branch secretary Peter Biagini said the union would also like to see some seats blocked off to help ensure physical distancing. He said safe social distancing needed to be maintained on public transport, but drivers should not have to be the ones to enforce it. "Members of the public need to pitch in to ensure that there is social distancing happening on public transport  if we all do our bit we can come out of this stronger," he said. "We have been campaigning on having screens installed for the drivers for years to stop them being assaulted and spat on  if we had these in already then our members would be much more comfortable at work during this pandemic. "We will continue to push for 10 days of special pandemic leave for any driver who has been possibly exposed to COVID-19 so that they can self-isolate without worrying about paying the bills." Associate Professor Mackay said air-conditioning systems on public transport vehicles helped dilute any viruses and said he was not sure if limiting seats was necessary, given the position Queensland was in. Latest information from Queensland Health. But both Mr Bailey and Brisbane Lord Mayor Adrian Schrinner said patronage levels would be monitored. "If there are issues arising, that's something we're happy to have a look at," Cr Schrinner said. "Ultimately it does require people just to use a bit of common sense to make sure they are as safe as possible." Mr Bailey said extra train services could be added during shoulder peak hours to help give passengers more space. "It will be different to how it was before the pandemic and we'll be monitoring that closely and if we need to make adjustments to that, we will," he said. He said extra cleaning services had been brought on as a precaution. "We've had very strong measures in place since the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic  things like cashless ticketing, rear door boarding on our buses, tripling of cleaning on our trains and we've seen cleaning and hygiene routines right across our modes increase considerably." P&C Queensland chief executive Kevan Goodworth said catching public transport needed to be managed, but he had not heard of any complaints or concerns from parents on the issue. "I think this will come out in the wash next week when we see what happens," Mr Goodworth said. "We are encouraging parents to talk to the schools. "Schools are back on Monday and that's where [the students] need to be." 
Coronavirus has made state borders a battle zone and premiers are manning the barricades
Who'd be Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk right now? Facing a tough election in October, Palaszczuk is coming under huge pressure to open the state's borders, so visitors in search of winter sun can start to get the tourist industry back on its feet. She's in the sights not just of the Federal Government, with Peter Dutton ("a proud Queenslander") leading the charge, but of NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian as well. Ms Palaszczuk so far is holding firm, saying she'll follow the advice of her Chief Health Officer, Jeannette Young.  The border closure will be reviewed monthly; it could stay shut until September, and Dr Young says possibly even longer. It depends on the number of active cases in NSW and Victoria, which have far more than Queensland. It might be Queensland first opens up to South Australia and the Northern Territory before re-opening the border with NSW. In political terms, Ms Palaszczuk is on risky ground whatever she does. Depriving the state's economy of much-needed dollars will give ammunition to her opponents. On the other hand, if an open border led to a serious outbreak in a tourist centre, forcing fresh shutdowns, she'd carry the blame. It's a dilemma to which there is no "correct" answer. So far, Ms Palaszczuk has voters' support in how she's handled the pandemic (although her government's rating is lower than those of other state governments). In the Essential poll published this week, 66 per cent of Queenslanders answered good or very good when asked, "How would you rate your state government's response to the COVID-19 outbreak?" In WA, 86 per cent rated the McGowan Government's performance positively. (The Federal Government received a tick from 73 per cent.) But voters are fickle, and opinions can change quickly. We saw this over kids being in school. At first, many parents insisted their children must stay home; after a few weeks, they were pressing for schools to take them back. The schools debate produced fault lines in the National Cabinet, and now the row over borders is doing the same. That useful body remains intact, but this creates tensions, even though border policies are the decisions of individual states, not the collective. The conflict might also be something of a reality check on the idea the National Cabinet would enable a harmonious road to future economic reform. A notable feature of the COVID federalism model is that under the National Cabinet umbrella, line ups vary according to the issue. Victoria (Labor) and NSW (Coalition) were the loudest in urging early heavy restrictions, including in relation to schools. The Federal Government, with its eye on economics, instinctively preferred a lighter hand; it needed a shove to go further. Where it couldn't be moved and the states had the power, they went their own ways. On schools, Scott Morrison was adamant and always wanted them open. Similarly, it wanted borders opened. The border issue sees another cross-party grouping. The Labor jurisdictions of Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory, and the Liberal states of South Australia and Tasmania all have their borders closed. NSW and Victoria have never gone down this path. Ms Berejiklian is pushing hard for a re-opening to promote recovery. She's suggested Mr McGowan and Ms Palaszczuk are courting popularity. In the crossfire, Mr McGowan has accused Ms Berejiklian of bullying tactics and hit where it hurts. "New South Wales had the Ruby Princess  And they are trying to give us advice on our borders, seriously?" he said this week.  Ms Palaszczuk said: "We are not going to be lectured to by a state that has the highest number of cases in Australia". As notable as the fracture among governments, is the very public division between health experts. We saw this on schools, where Victoria's Chief Health Officer Brett Sutton took a much more conservative position than others. While Dr Young and WA Chief Health Officer Andrew Robertson were adamant this week on keeping their respective borders shut for the time being, federal Deputy Chief Medical Officer Paul Kelly said "from a medical point of view, I can't see why the borders are still closed". (Mr McGowan had earlier said: "I don't know who Paul Kelly is  clearly not the singer".) Dr Kelly said neither the National Cabinet nor the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (that advises it) had made decisions or given advice on state borders. Decisions on what to do were entirely up to the states. Both Dr Young and Dr Robertson are on the AHPPC, which is described as a "consensus body". "We talked through these matters and we decided not to have a position on borders," Dr Kelly explained. While it has been welcome in this crisis to see the politicians turning to the experts, we are now being sharply reminded experts can differ. How often have we heard from politicians in recent weeks, "We are relying on the medical advice"? But that doesn't always lead in one direction, and "consensus" can be a useful concealer. As the border argument intensifies the question of whether the closures are constitutional, canvassed early on in the crisis, has come back. One Nation's Pauline Hanson has accused Ms Palaszczuk of "running roughshod over the constitution", appealed for anyone affected who might want to mount a challenge to come forward, and said "I have a pro-bono, constitutional lawyer who will represent you in a High Court challenge under Section 92". Section 92 provides for "trade, commerce, and intercourse among the states" to be "absolutely free". Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. No-one could be sure how, if there were a case, the High Court would rule. The court in the past has recognised public health circumstances can justify measures that otherwise would breach section 92. But would special circumstances still apply when the virus threat had apparently receded? Attorney-General Christian Porter has dodged questions on whether the border closure could be unconstitutional. Mr Porter, a West Australian, has been measured on the issue itself. "These aren't easy decisions for state premiers to make but there's a health imperative, there's an economic imperative and there are strict constitutional rules around what is permissible and impermissible", he told a news conference on Thursday. He no doubt has in mind the thread of isolationism traditionally running through his state's thinking, and of the polling showing enormous support for the McGowan Government's COVID management. The day before, Mr Porter noted "that the Federal Government's position, on a whole range of issues, is to be forward leaning and develop workarounds to get our economy moving again". Indeed. We can expect the Morrison Government's "forward leaning" will only increase in coming weeks, with its desperation to boost economic activity. Meanwhile, premiers might need their chill pills before they meet, virtually, at National Cabinet next week. Michelle Grattan is a professorial fellow at the University of Canberra and chief political correspondent at The Conversation, where this article first appeared. 
Coronavirus Australia live news: JobKeeper cost slashed by $60b after accounting bungles revealed, NSW to let more people into pubs and restaurants
The number of people on JobKeeper has been revised down by 3 million after Treasury and the Australian Tax Office (ATO) revealed businesses made "significant errors". The estimated cost of the program has been nearly halved from $130 billion to about $70 billion. Look back at how the day's events unfolded. By Jon Healy By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton 
Ten-person dining rule for Sydney restaurants gets mixed response amid NSW coronavirus restrictions
No-show diners have been warned there is a "special place in hell" for them as Sydney restaurants get to grips with the state's 10-person dining rule. Eased NSW coronavirus restrictions, which came into effect last Friday, saw some restaurants and cafes open their doors again with only 10 customers allowed at a time. The newrules meant some eateries got some much-needed financial relief, but many have struggled to make opening worth their while. Surry Hills cocktail bar and restaurant Low 302 reopened this week but required bookings to secure a place.  A post addressing a no-show booking under the name Aimee went up on the bar's Facebook page on Saturday, telling her there was a "special place for you to burn in hospo hell". The post, which referenced the booking for four people, slammed the woman for wasting "40 per cent of the entire capacity". "You didn't have the common courtesy to call us up and cancel," the post read. "Maybe you have no idea the financial impact this has on a restaurant right now. Maybe you don't care. "You have single-handedly set the worst of precedence for our entire industry at this most difficult time." Low 302 now takes payment in advance to secure bookings at the restaurant, something management "really wanted to avoid having to do". Restaurateur BenSiderowitz said taking payment in advance allowed him to create an "experience" for diners while also giving staff security. Mr Siderowitz runs Corner House in Sydney's eastern suburbs and said he took 4,000 bookings after announcing a special dining package. Up to 10 people can book out the venue for four hours for a group fee of $1,000, which includes a private bartender and chef to provide unlimited pizza. "We take the deposit upfront, so if someone doesn't show up it doesn't matter," he said. "We put the onus on the customer, and with lack of supply, demand increases  people just want to snap up the spot." Mr Siderowitz said he stayed up for three nights replying to hundreds of messages that poured in after he announced the deal.  The interest was so great that Mr Siderowitz has secured a second venue, 900 metres down the road from Corner House in Bondi, which opened on Friday. Thanks to low overheads, lean staff numbers and a backlog of stock, Mr Siderowitz said it had been a big week, with most groups spending much more than the $1,000 package. "Revenue may be down 80 per cent but profit is up 100 per cent," he said. Fabio Dore runs One Ford Streetin Balmain and said the week had been fruitful for the popular restaurant. Mr Dore does not take pre-paid bookings but rather relies on the "loyalty of the locals" each night, as he has done for five years.  "I heard about the no-show in the city and I was very disappointed," he said. "It's common-sense thinking: if you book a restaurant, why wouldn't you turn up?" Mr Dore said he was comforted by the "safety net" of the JobKeeper payment for staff, which meant a no-show booking wouldn't damage the night's takings so severely. "But people should support the restaurant so it can survive, so your favourite restaurant is able to make it through this difficult time," he said. He said the 10-person limit had provided an opportunity to adapt the One Ford Street menu while maintaining a premium experience for diners. "Read the situation  if you're smart enough, what you're cooking can be a very good margin," he said. 
What science and tech can teach us about how to deal with a crisis like coronavirus
Changing in a time of crisis is what makes us resilient  in fact, it's what gets us through.  That's the lesson ecologist Brian Walker says we can look to as we come to grips with the coronavirus pandemic. Dr Walker, from the CSIRO, has spent a lifetime studying natural ecosystems including in Africa, Canada and the Australian outback. Each in their own way has brought him to the same conclusion: change in crisis is necessary. Resilience doesn't equal resistance. "If you have a system that you want to maintain, then resilience of that system is the capacity to absorb a disturbance," Dr Walker told The Drum. "And then reorganise as a result of that disturbance in such a way that the next time a disturbance of that kind comes along, they can cope with it better." These ideas, Dr Walker has found, can be applied to human nature. He says they are something for society to consider as we deal with the broad, ongoing impacts of COVID-19. Monash University's Rashina Hoda says observing environmental ecosystems has formed part of the software development process for a while now.  "Some of the research has looked at social networks in ant colonies: how they organise and reorganise around challenges," she said.  When it comes to the coronavirus context, the associate professor at Monash University's Department of Software Systems and Cybersecurity told The Drum that being "agile" is essential. It is a concept traditionally reserved for software engineering teams.  "You've got a swift response, clear policies through consultation with the right experts and at the same time, a very human spirit to all of it."  Dr Hoda believes "agile nations" have been more effective dealing with COVID-19  Australia included.  "I think Australia's done really well." She applauded the government's swift response to the outbreak but says a big part of the relative success has been the community's cooperation and willingness to adapt.  "If we didn't listen in and didn't follow through it would not have been possible, no matter how clear the guidelines."  "If both aren't on board with being agile, it's not going to happenn" she said.  Much as with Dr Walker's ecosystems, Dr Hoda says change is a necessary part of the equation.  "You see countries such as the United States; people who have very strongly resisted this saying we're not going to change, this is the way we live. That kind of response is not the right response to a crisis. "Even if it's just lifestyle choices for a temporary period of time." The Drum looked at the idea of resilience earlier this week and heard how different sections of the community might relate during the COVID-19 crisis.  "Country people are some of the best ones at changing and adapting to new circumstances," National Farmers Federation President Fiona Simson said.  "It's adapting and it's having hope and it's having a vision and knowing that there's something in the future and you've got some control about that." Ms Simson said now is the "perfect time" to have conversations about change, as the immediate COVID-19 threat appears to be subsiding. However, Sydney Morning Herald political editor Peter Hartcher warned Australia's decades of economic success may have left us less open to change and we're dealing with the results of that now. "The consequence was great complacency to the point where there was serious decay in our political system and failure in our ability to adapt to climate change. "We get to a pointless decade of wasted time." Now, he believes, we might be in the midst of real change.  "You're hearing statements like 'we need to think about our global supply chain arrangements' and 'need to rethink the way the medical profession and our hospitals are set up and funded," he said "Those light bulbs are going on." He does warn that statements are no good without real action.  
Australian community sport can survive coronavirus challenges through volunteer spirit
For organised sport the advent of National Volunteer Week can be heart warming and also somewhat problematic. It is a time when administrators reach out to their grassroots workers and acknowledge some of the glowing examples of the dedicated volunteers who keep community clubs on the field. The legendary local coach, the bloke who runs the bar or the canteen, the family that washes the jerseys, the high school kid who operates the all-abilities program and all those who perform one of the many tasks required to keep the most important level of sport ticking along. But, increasingly, the acknowledgement of volunteers can also unwittingly emphasise the widening gap between well-funded professional sports administrators and participants, and those at the base of sporting pyramid reaching into their own pockets to support their communities. Given the challenges created by the COVID-19 shutdown, this month's National Volunteer Week comes at an even more delicate time in the sometimes tense relationship between professional and community sport. As ever, most of the media's emphasis on sport over the past few months has been about the urgent attempts to get the major football codes back on the field to provide content for media partners whose rights deals fund sport  at least notionally  from top to bottom. Given this trickle-down economy, making professional leagues the first priority is justifiable, assuming these sports have demonstrated a genuine commitment to their grassroots competitions and clubs. But sport must be more dependent then ever on the commitment of volunteers over the coming months, even years, as local clubs confront the various financial and logistical hurdles they must clear to get back to training and playing in the midst of the pandemic that has flattened their economies. These challenges have become more stark in recent days as clubs across various codes grapple with the strict protocols they must follow to safely conduct even limited non-contact, small squad training sessions in preparation for still hypothetical seasons. In most cases this involves appointing a safety officer for each group of 10, recording the names and taking the temperatures of participants, ensuring squads are correctly spaced, keeping youngsters who've been cooped up for weeks from climbing all over each other and sanitising equipment. This is after club officials have calculated funding shortfalls from lost sponsorships and matchday revenue, renegotiated ground hire with local councils, considered any further fine print imposed by their leagues and associations, and factored in the health and reputational risks should their club create a COVID-19 outbreak. And before the players kick, throw or a hit a ball they will have to convince residents now using grounds as outdoor gymnasiums to exercise elsewhere, which is potentially the most confronting task of all. This is why a local club president or coach might consider with envy the supposedly "heavy burden" of an NRL or AFL official forced to choose which of several expert assistant coaches, fitness and medical staff will be excluded from their pods and bubbles. This is not to trivialise the plight of those in professional sports who might lose their incomes, rather it is merely to illustrate the very different lives of those well-paid coaches and stars who sometimes suggest "I love the game so much I would do it for nothing" and those who do. What this presents is a test of good faith for those sports administrations who this week lauded their local volunteers. Those peak-level sports administrations that genuinely appreciate the efforts will not just be uttering hollow sentiments about their volunteers. They will cut shrunken cloths in a way that ensures their grassroots commitment is maintained or find other imaginative ways to support clubs suffering hardship. Particularly, they will acknowledge the local clubs  with vastly varying levels of expertise  that were already struggling with the complex challenges of local government red tape, grant applications and other administrative issues before the pandemic put a hole in their funding and pool of volunteers, and threatened club membership numbers. At the same time local clubs might also find out during these even more testing times something about the calibre and the motivation of their own committees and volunteers, and  particularly  their commitment to their broader communities. The best of local volunteers will champion their club's efforts to get players  and particularly juniors  back on the training track despite the tough regulations.  They will understand the importance of maintaining relationships with members, particularly kids who might be lost forever if their connection with the sport is broken during the shutdown. This in itself provides a test for coaches: are you willing to supervise modified sessions that might only be recreational, or is your interest purely in training for competitive games where your own ego is invested in the outcome? While recognising the difficulties of dealing with the new protocols, I suggest the junior coach throwing his or hands in the air because non-contact skills sessions will not be rewarded with trophies and medals at the end of this season might not have been the right coach anyway. What we do know is that the volunteers honoured at this time next year after guiding their clubs through the toughest of times, and in some cases ensuring their survival, will be genuine local heroes. Offsiders will cover all the major issues from across sport, including the football codes' return to play in detail, on Sunday at 10:00am on ABC TV. 
Super funds have been battered by coronavirus, but panic is your worst enemy
The year began so well. In the first seven weeks of 2020, our super funds were charging ahead as the stock market went from record high to record high. It was a continuation of 2019, which had been the best year since 2013, prompting respected ratings house Super Ratings to predict that, "super members have every reason to be optimistic about 2020." Fortunately for Super Ratings, it added this caveat: "But when it comes to a repeat of 2019's double-digit returns, it would be wise to temper expectations." How right they were. Between February 20 and the March 23 the stock market crashed by 36 per cent. If ever you needed convincing that financial markets have become completely divorced from reality, just look at Wall Street's wild swings, writes Ian Verrender.  As a result, according to Super Ratings, the median balanced superannuation fund fell 8.9 per cent in March, while the median growth fund, with its higher exposure to shares, plunged 12.5 per cent. Ouch! If you are closer to the end of your working life than the beginning, and you have hundreds of thousands of dollars in your super fund, that's a lot of money gone in just a few weeks. But, like everything in life, superannuation needs some perspective. The reality is, most superannuation funds are heavily leveraged to the stock market, and markets go up, and they go down. Finding the best super arrangement can be complicated. But it's an important part of you and your family's financial future  and taking steps to improve your retirement savings may be easier than you think. Australia's biggest super fund, Australian Super, tells its members to expect to lose money five years out of 20. The hope is that the gains in the other 15 years will more than make up for the five years of losses. For Australian Super, the average annual return on its balanced fund since inception in 1985 is 9.68 per cent, despite the bad years. The last negative year for Australian Super's balanced fund was at the peak of the global financial crisis in 2009, when it lost 13.4 per cent. Since then it's been 10 consecutive years of gains, seven of them double digits. So, quite understandably, while no one was expecting COVID-19 and the havoc it's wreaked on the global economy, we should not be surprised that, at some point, our super funds were going to have a bad year after a decade of going forward. The reality for our superannuation from what's happened so far this year is that most of the gains from 2019 have been erased. It's not Armageddon, and we still have the benefits of the previous nine consecutive years of positive returns. Which raises a really important question. If you are losing a lot of sleep about what's happening to your superannuation in 2020, maybe you are in the wrong fund? Financial adviser Louise Lakomy, from Crystal Wealth Partners, told the ABC she received a big spike in calls from worried clients as the stock market tanked in March. "And that raised in my mind the issue of risk profile," she said. "If you are going to react so severely to your super going backwards, are you in the right risk profile for you?" A key tenet of investing is to choose investments that match your tolerance for risk or, more accurately, your tolerance for seeing your investment go backwards. As efforts to control COVID-19 appear to be gaining traction, many analysts and traders are hoping for a quick return to business as usual. They're likely to be disappointed, writes Ian Verrender. After a decade of seeing their super funds going onwards and upwards there are many people who are probably shocked to see them losing money and, at the same time, realising they would probably rather be in a fund that's not as exposed to the share market. The problem of course is that to change investing strategy now  to a more conservative, less share market-focussed option  is to crystallise the losses and, even worse, as Louise Lakomy explained. "No one rings a bell at the bottom of the market," she said. "If you're out of the market you'll miss the recovery." The year 2009 is a case in point. After being devastated by the GFC, the stock market hit its low point on February 28 that year. A stunning turnaround followed and by the end of 2009 it had soared by 46 per cent. While superannuation is not set and forget, it is a long-term investment that will go up and down, and we shouldn't overreact to the downs. One thing history has taught us is that the stock market may fall further, but it will come roaring back. The only thing we don't know is when. 
Australian theatre companies faced with arts funding cuts and the coronavirus shutdown get creative
Life is slowly beginning to come back to some degree of normalcy in many parts of Australia, with easing restrictions seeing cinemas open again and a trip to the pub in sight. But live performing arts  whether that's delighting in a blockbuster musical, taking in the opera or seeing the latest in independent and experimental theatre  looks like one of the last things that will return to normal when this pandemic is under control. Our performing arts companies have had to cancel shows and shutter their doors since mid-March, cutting off what for many is their main income stream.  Earlier this month, COVID-19 claimed its first major arts scalp: Carriageworks  Australia's biggest multi-arts venue  went into administration due to a combination of lost income from the venue closure, insufficient reserves and a last-minute failure to secure its anticipated state government funding. Hear the latest stories from stages across the country. Elsewhere in the arts sector, companies are reeling from the latest funding round announcement by the Australia Council, the Federal Government's arts funding body, which left 49 previously funded small-to-medium arts organisations without four-year operational funding. We asked five companies  from major players to smaller companies without federal funding  how they are faring through the shutdown.  Their answers highlight fears around the uncertain future and significant hurdles to overcome, as well as the creative ways they are adapting to the sector's shutdown.  Julian Louis is the artistic director and CEO of the Northern Rivers Performing Arts Group (NORPA), a theatre company based in Lismore in northern New South Wales. NORPA has had to cancel six productions and postpone another. The company's income has taken an additional hit from cancelled venue hire. While they have been able to keep their core staff on through the JobKeeper program, this doesn't include artists (who are employed on short-term contracts, making them ineligible for the scheme). Louis told RN's The Stage Show that during the shutdown he's asked his staff "to work outside their normal spheres, to think about the company differently  and it's actually [been] a very creative time". "It's a rare time where you're not under the pressure of an opening night [coming up], ticket sales and box office success. So we're actually looking at renewing ourselves, which is really valuable and very rare." Louis says that despite the setbacks of COVID-19, his company's future is secure after NORPA found themselves on the right side of the Australia Council's recent funding decisions. That means that from 2021, NORPA will have four-year-funding for the first time in its 27-year history. "I know that [federal arts funding] is a very small pie though, and the number of companies that miss out on this, and we've been one in the past  and it's devastating," says Louis. The arts sector's current funding crisis can be traced back to 2015, when George Brandis, then minister for the arts, siphoned $104.7 million away from the Australia Council into the National Programme for Excellence in the Arts, a fund distributed at his discretion. "The Federal Government really has not increased its funding as our industry has grown," says Louis. In the last financial year, the Australia Council distributed $186 million of funding (across the entire sector, from the Major Performing Arts companies down to individual artists), down from $199.2 million in 2013-2014 (which, adjusted for inflation, is equivalent to $216 million today). Perth children's theatre company Barking Gecko is one of the 49 companies that will lose federal funding from 2021.  "The funding announcement coming right in the middle of COVID-19 has really created a perfect storm and taken the planks of stability out from under the company," says artistic director Luke Kerridge.  "The worry is not the short-term but the medium-term." Barking Gecko has had to postpone their 2020 season due to COVID-19, including their ambitious touring plans and the creation of new work. "Then [we had to] pivot really quickly and reimagine what right now looks like, and what 2021 looks like," says Kerridge. Kerridge says that by accessing JobKeeper and repurposing touring funds they have been able to retain their staff, which has enabled them to launch a new digital initiative to continue connecting and creating with children through the shutdown: Isolate > Create > Connect. This program sees Barking Gecko partner with Indian youth arts company ThinkArts to deliver weekly creative tasks to children, designed by artists. Despite the challenges wrought by both the pandemic and the funding decision, Kerridge is feeling "strangely optimistic". "My hope is that coming back together in a physical space will take on more meaning post-COVID; maybe we will enjoy that sense of togetherness more now that we've seen that we can take it for granted." Kerridge and his team are looking forward to returning to the production that Barking Gecko had been developing before the shutdown  House  which has an eerily timely story. "It's about characters who wait out a storm in a house, and then have to summon the resilience to go back out there once it's over." At the end of last year, Lee Lewis left the intimacy of Sydney's 105-seat Griffin theatre to become artistic director of Queensland Theatre  a major performing arts (MPA) company funded through the MPA framework. Queensland Theatre has two spaces  the larger one with 350 seats  and Lewis says they've had to scale back hours at the company and let some of their staff go (the company is a statutory body of the Queensland Government, and thus ineligible for JobKeeper). "We're talking about the next steps beyond that, depending on how long this goes for. If we manage to perform before the end of the year, then we're hoping to minimise that impact," Lewis says. "But if it goes longer than we're projecting at the moment, then there's not a lot of great future for the permanency of this company." With no income from performances, Queensland Theatre's expenditure nonetheless continues: they are still delivering their education program to 100 schools around the state (which they've now taken online), staffing the winding down of their subscription season  and starting to plan for the eventual re-opening.  Lewis says mounting plays at the scale of Queensland Theatre is costly and would be unsustainable with the reduced audience entailed by social distancing restrictions. "I feel like the Federal Government, especially, just doesn't have any interest in addressing the problems that we're facing in the arts community. And that was before the shutdown," Lewis says. "I feel like we've failed as an industry to convince government over the last 20 years of our inherent worth to the society that we live in. I think we've got to stop trying to lobby government and I think we've got to take our focus back to winning over audiences." Queensland Ballet, also funded through the MPA framework, employs 180 people (including 60 dancers) and has been able to keep staff on through the JobKeeper scheme. Artistic director Li Cunxin says that the first step the company took once they knew the shutdown was imminent was "creating as much online content as possible". This has included classes and coaching sessions for the dancers as well as the public. They also had to get flooring and portable ballet barres out to their dancers so that they could stay fit at home. Cunxin says there are two priorities for his company at the moment: "One is to keep our team together  So during these isolation period times  [when things try] to pull us apart, we have to be even stronger as a team." "And the second thing for us is really planning ahead to not only survive this pandemic but also emerge a stronger and more focused organisation." Queensland Ballet performs in a theatre with a capacity of 2,000, making a return to "business as usual" highly unlikely in the short term; accordingly, the company has made the decision to move its entire 2020 season to 2021. "[But] we obviously still have expenses we have to pay. And our 60-year anniversary gala was pulled a week before [it was scheduled to take place]  so the whole program [was] set, choreographed, rehearsed, we had overseas creatives fly in," Cunxin says. The company is forecasting a 43 per cent decline in revenue for 2020 but is hoping donors and corporate partners will step up, launching   a campaign and website to generate donations. Queensland Ballet will also be releasing 60 new short dance works on this platform, choreographed by their dancers and commissioned to celebrate the company's 60th anniversary. "I do hope when we come out of this that we all will be able to continue to practice or deliver the magic of this art form," says Cunxin. Declan Greene is the new artistic director of Griffin  the country's only theatre company dedicated to new Australian writing, which performs works in the 105-seat SBW Stables Theatre in Sydney's Darlinghurst. "You're literally breathing the same air as the performers, but that sounded a lot more appealing before COVID," says Greene. Griffin have retained their casual front-of-house, box office and bar staff  who are directors and playwrights with their own artistic practices  in part-time jobs as literary associates during the shutdown. They were also able to pay the actors and creatives for their production of Kindness, which was scheduled to open shortly after the shutdown began. He says that they were in the financial position to do so because the first show of the 2020 season  David Williamson's Family Values  "far exceeded its box office targets". Griffin receives funding from the Australia Council and Create NSW, and is supported by philanthropy; Greene says they are unlikely to share Carriageworks' fate. "The more troubling thing for us is just  it's obviously a hugely uncertain world that we're attempting to plan for." None of the artistic directors we spoke to know when, or for how long, social distancing measures will be eased enough to allow for performances. "So it just becomes very, very unpredictable about just how we  still manage to employ artists to make art, which is something that is a huge priority for the company," he says. In the meantime, the company undertook an experimental program of works called Griffin Lock-in, in which they paid five artists to make one-off performances for live streaming. "It's really interesting to explore ways that we can kind of create liveness and create a sense of live theatrical community online," Greene says. His interest in online performance extends beyond the pandemic, "because there are a lot of accessibility barriers in theatre as well, which are sometimes financial  and also [sometimes] to do with just access for neurodiverse and disabled folk". "So that's definitely something I want to continue exploring as a company." 
Africa has not been hit hard by coronavirus yet, but the disease could 'smoulder' there for years
Oluwaseun Ayodeji Osowobi left London triumphant and exhausted, but satisfied. She had gone to the UK to lobby for her Nigerian organisation, Stand to End Rape, and be the flag bearer at the annual Commonwealth Day ceremony. She even met Prince Charles at a glamorous reception in London. But on the plane back to Lagos in mid-March, Ms Osowobi started to feel extremely ill. "I thought that maybe I had malaria, maybe I was tired because I'd had a busy week I didn't think it was coronavirus," she told the ABC.  The symptoms worsened when she got home.  "I was experiencing diarrhoea, I was vomiting, I was nauseous, I couldn't eat, I lost my sense of taste  it was a very tough period for me," Ms Osowobi said.  The 29-year-old, who is a prominent campaigner against sexual violence in Nigeria, had heard about the global spread of coronavirus and quickly got herself tested.  The positive result made her one of the African continent's first confirmed cases of COVID-19.  "It was new in Nigeria. I was the third case and the first female, actually and it was very scary," she said. Her case of COVID-19 was so bad that she became fearful she might die.  "With the number of deaths recorded globally, I was almost certain I might not pull through, surviving the virus." But when she recovered and went public with her experiences, she was attacked online and accused of lying.  With the backing of health authorities and international agencies, she released a video urging others to practice social distancing and get themselves tested.  "I was the first person actually in Nigeria to come forward about surviving COVID-19 and I had photos, I had evidence to back up my story," she said. "When that video was published people still said 'how much was I paid by the government?', 'what kind of lie was I sharing online?', so it was very sad to read that." In Nigeria, like a number of countries in Africa, many people were sceptical about the virus, suspecting governments were exaggerating the threat.  Myths circulated in Nigeria that the disease only affected rich people or would be killed by hot weather. "It is reflecting an attitude of disbelief and lack of trust in the system," Ms Osowobi said of her doubters. "They thought the Government was using the virus to embezzle money or get donations." Coronavirus has been slow to spread across Africa, but Ms Osowobi's experience shows some of the challenges the continent could face when COVID-19 takes hold.  There are about 85,000 confirmed cases of African COVID-19, according to the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. For a continent with more than one billion residents, that's a comparatively low infection rate.  Meanwhile, the United States has more than one million cases of COVID-19 among its 328 million citizens.  The World Health Organisation says transmission rates have been much lower in Africa than elsewhere because of poor transport networks and low levels of economic integration.  Several African nations also implemented restrictions early on in the pandemic, according to the WHO's Emergency Operations Manager in Africa, Dr Michel Yao. "Some countries even started the measures before receiving cases so this could have slowed down the process," Dr Michel Yao told the ABC.  "Most of the first cases were imported so it was within a certain class of people who can afford to travel. It was not in the high-density places where the disease can spread faster." Dr Yao says the outbreak has not yet reached many rural areas.  "We face a situation that the number of cases is increasing as detection capacity increases, but it's not at the level that was experienced in China or Europe or the USA," he said.  Some African countries have even reported the number of active cases dropping to zero, but Dr Yao told the ABC that does not mean authorities could relax.  "We are very worried about 24 countries in sub-Saharan Africa and also Algeria. Half of them have community transmission and this is our main worry," he said. "If this community transmission moves into the high-density areas the situation could change, so we are not saying the situation is under control." The slow spread had led the WHO to predict the disease could "smoulder" in Africa, meaning localised outbreaks could continue for years. Some fear that if the rest of the world moves on while Africa continues to suffer from outbreaks, that would lead to greater travel restrictions, increased economic hardship and irregular migration to Europe and elsewhere. A massive testing and tracing effort is underway to prevent the disease from becoming entrenched. The Africa Centres for Disease Control (CDC) says health authorities will test 10 million people over the next six months. The CDC deputy director Dr Ahmed Ogwell Ouma said he doubted African nations would become a reservoir for COVID-19 because of their experience dealing with epidemics like the outbreaks of Ebola.  "We are way more prepared than many countries in the world and we are prepared because we have had huge epidemics before," he said. "We are going to get a very good control over this virus in a shorter time than others have done, simply because we have learnt lessons from previous outbreaks and we are using those lessons to try to contain the spread of the virus," he said.  African nations have some of the lowest rates of intensive care beds per capita, but few countries have faced excessive demand yet.  The WHO said this is because African nations have a much younger population than Europe and the US. In some countries, only 2 per cent of the population is above the age of 60.  They have also pointed out that some nations have recorded high rates of asymptomatic cases and low numbers of cases with severe complications. But there are countries where a questionable government response could be clouding the extent of the crisis. In Tanzania, President John Magufuli has refused to shut places of worship, while also casting doubt on testing and questioning the danger of the virus. Tanzania's Government has not reported new case figures since April 29. Meanwhile, in Burundi, the country's repressive Government expelled the WHO team after facing criticism for its lax response to the pandemic. Burundi pressed ahead with an election on May 20 despite the presence of the disease.  Many countries still have active conflicts, making it difficult for health authorities to implement containment and testing.  Even once African nations get through the pandemic, they could face another crisis: a lack of food caused by economic disruptions and lockdowns, which have come at the same time as locust plagues and drought in East Africa.  Joseph Siegel, the director of research for the Africa Centre for Strategic Studies, studied the effects of the Spanish flu pandemic on African nations and found that starvation was widespread.  "The bulk of the pandemic happened in 1918 but a lot of the famine and near-famine conditions happened in 1919, so I think for Africa we want to be keeping an eye on food production and helping to protect that," Mr Siegel said. "With so many people living off subsistence wages now, the food crisis is already affecting people."  
Victoria's VCE exams to start in early November, bringing certainty to students amid coronavirus disruption
Victoria's year 12 students will begin to sit their final exams in early November after weeks of uncertainty and disruption as schools prepare for students to return from next week. Many students were anxious about exams spilling over into 2021 with a potential disruption to higher education ambitions. But the Andrews Government now says exams will all be completed by December 2, which is two weeks later than the original completion date of November 18 set before the pandemic. The announcement comes as year 11 and 12 students as well as prep, year 1 and year 2 students prepare to return to the classroom next Tuesday after nearly six weeks of remote learning. With VCE exams to be finished at the start of December, year 12 students will receive their ATAR score before the end of 2020, rather than January 2021, which was feared at the height of the COVID-19 crisis. VCE exams will begin in the week starting November 9, which is a month earlier than expected when learning from home was first announced. The changes mean university offers can be made to Victorian students in time for the start of the 2021 academic year. Education Minister James Merlino said on Friday the Victorian Curriculum and Assessment Authority (VCAA) had made "tweaks" to Unit 4 VCE content and assessments in light of COVID-19, but said exams would not be altered. Mr Merlino said starting exams in November meant "no disadvantage for Victorian students in terms of university and other pathways". "The pathway for students will be exactly the same as students right around the country," he said. But Portland Bayview College principal Michelle Kearney told the ABC Mr Merlino's comments were "a very urban-centric viewpoint". She said regional students should be granted special consideration because of poor quality internet during the lockdown compared to their metro counterparts. "That's one of the things that has been an issue for us. The lack of real reliability of the internet for some of our Zoom lessons that we've had with our students," she said. "Regional students need to have special entry consideration looked at." The Australian Principals Federation previously called for year 12 exams to be axed this year, after concerns the crisis would leave many students unfairly disadvantaged. Year 12 student at Minaret College Rumaan Baryala is a member of the Victorian Student Representative Council and told ABC Radio Melbourne the announcement was the first time he was "glad to hear about an exam timetable". Updated Sunday, May 24 Mr Baryala said he was "really happy to receive clarity" about the exams and students' chances of getting in university in 2021. "Obviously I'm still going to be anxious about [COVID-19] when I return back to the classroom, it will still be in the back of my mind. But we'll try to distract ourselves as much as we can," Mr Baryala said. Alice, who is also in year 12, told ABC Radio Melbourne remote learning had brought its challenges and not being around others had been difficult. "This has come at a good time, waiting this long has been good because we haven't been jumping around and changing routines. It has been nice to slow down life and be able to focus on our study routine," she said. Mr Merlino said it was too early to tell if there would be a notable rise in the number of year 12 students applying for special consideration this year. Schools in Victoria will have a pupil-free day on Monday before year 11 and 12 students as well as prep, year 1 and year 2 students return to the classroom on Tuesdayafter almost six weeks of remote learning. Those who teach other year levels will conduct home learning from the school. Mr Merlino said staggered pick-up and drop-off times would be implemented to prevent parents congregating at the school gate but physical distancing would not take place in classrooms. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Mr Merlino also said the Government had advised schools to provide refunds of schools fees to parents for things like camps and excursions. "Those things won't be part of school life for some time yet," he said. "We're giving some common sense advice to schools, in terms of parent fees for those kinds of extracurricular activities." Mr Merlino said the Government was supporting and working closely with schools that had been financially impacted by COVID-19. Mr Merlino said he understood some teachers, parents and students would be concerned about their health when students returned to the classroom. He referenced a "significant increase in funding to make sure that schools are cleaned regularly" and said hand sanitiser, guidelines for within schools and the huge drive to voluntarily test teachers were in place to protect the health of students and staff. He said 10,000 school staff had been tested for coronavirus over the last 10 days and none had tested positive. State schools will be staggering lunch, recess and library visiting times to avoid students in different year levels coming into contact with one another. "Each school will work through this on a school-by-school basis," Mr Merlino said. Playgrounds will be open for students in schools and cleaned regularly but water fountains are off-limits. 
Cyclone Mangga heading for WA, bringing rain, wind and waves as coronavirus travel bans ease
A rare out-of-cycle cyclone that has formed into a category one system in the Indian Ocean is set to bring dangerous weather to Western Australia, including Perth, from Sunday. Tropical Cyclone Mangga will impact the Cocos Keeling Islands today before tracking towards WA. The official Australian cyclone season ends on April 30 and the Bureau of Meteorology (BOM) said while some cyclones were known to form in early May, it was rare to see one so late in the month. The Cyclone Mangga was located about 515 kilometres north-west of the Cocos Keeling Islands just before midnight and was expected to pass to the west of the islands later today, potentially resulting in heavy rainfall and a period of gale-force winds.  The BOM said it was expected to weaken tomorrow as it continued to move south-east towards WA's north-west coast and was "highly unlikely to be a tropical cyclone" come Sunday. Senior forecaster Luke Huntington said the combination of a tropical low and a cold front occurring at the same time, especially this time of year, was out of the ordinary. "We don't normally see this system at all, really, so it's quite unprecedented," he said. "If it was going to happen, it would be earlier in the summer period when we do get the tropical cyclones and lows  but to have it this late in the season, it is quite unusual. "It's just a coincidence the cold front came up at the same time and it's just going to deepen this low as it comes down towards the west coast, and create all that rain and the damaging winds." Torrential rain and dangerous winds are expected to come from the state's north-west before extending south-east over the remainder of the state on Sunday and Monday. "We can expect widespread damaging winds of around 100 kilometres an hour and in some regions it could even exceed 125kph," Mr Huntington said. "There's also some quite significant rainfall associated with it as well  in isolated areas, particularly along the west coast, some areas could receive even up to 100 millimetres." BOM spokesman Neil Bennett said yesterday it was "an evolving and dynamic system" that would still pack a punch on Sunday as it tracked down the west coast. "It'll produce severe weather, in terms of wind, some heavy rainfall in places and significant wave heights," he said. "We're looking at dangerous swells, severe weather warnings for the winds and possibly some heavy rainfall as well  right up and down the west coast." BOM has cautioned that it was still too early to pinpoint which areas would be hardest hit, but a prolonged period of strong winds was expected. Do you know how cyclones could affect you and what to pack in your survival kit? Take our quiz to see how prepared you really are. It said at this stage, rainfall totals in Pilbara coastal areas were likely to be about 2040mm, with isolated falls from Karratha to Kalbarri of up to 100mm. Heavy rain is also possible along coastal areas from Kalbarri to Albany, including Perth, with totals of about 2030mm and some isolated falls up to 70mm. At least 510mm is forecast for much of the Wheatbelt, with areas closer to the west coast expecting 1020mm. Peak wave heights in excess of 8 metres are predicted for much of the west coast on Monday and they have the potential to cause significant beach erosion, while storm tides could lead to coastal inundation. The severe weather will coincide with the first weekend since regional travel restrictions were eased in WA, with an influx of people expected on the roads. But fine weather is forecast for most of the state until Sunday, providing plenty of opportunity to tie down loose items around the home and clear out gutters. Here's a guide to help you work out what will be allowed from May 18 and what is still offlimits. In WA, late autumn and winter rainfall usually comes in the form of cold fronts. The BOM has described this system as a "rare event"  the result of the remnants of a tropical low interacting with a cold front coming up from the south. "This sort of system has happened in the past, but it's something that would probably only happen once every two or three years, maybe even once every five to 10," Mr Bennett said. A similar event occurred in June 2012, which led to more than 600 calls for assistance and more than 170,000 homes losing power. Squally winds and rain are also forecast for Monday but conditions should gradually ease throughout the day. 
Coronavirus border wars have NSW, WA, Queensland premiers playing firmly to their home crowds
They're not neighbours, yet somehow New South Wales and Western Australia have managed to engage themselves in a border skirmish. The verbal grenades between the two state's premiers have created fresh cracks in the relatively harmonious cooperation between the states and territories over coronavirus. So what's really going on? While a medical expert panel drove the decision to shut Australia's international borders, decision-making about domestic travel has been made by individual states and territories. Those with closed borders  the Northern Territory, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania and Western Australia  have cited health reasons for their reluctance to reopen them too quickly. But NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian clearly has her state's economy in mind as she calls for these borders to reopen. NSW is heavily reliant on tourism and even though it's unlikely to see international travellers for some time, allowing more domestic holiday-makers would help struggling accommodation, food and entertainment businesses. Last year, 39 million domestic travellers visited New South Wales, spending more than $23.5 billion. Almost $10 billion of this was spent by 14.8 million holidaymakers. In comparison, just over 4 million domestic travellers chose to holiday in WA, spending more than $3 billion. WA's border closure  creating what Premier Mark McGowan dubbed "an island within an island"  has not dramatically hurt the state's all-important resources industry. Interstate fly-in, fly-out workers have been able to enter the state because the resources industry was deemed an essential service by the WA Government. So borders aren't as big an economic issue for WA as they are for NSW. But clearly the spat is not just about economics, as Ms Berejiklian suggested to ABC News Breakfast this morning. "I'm sure those premiers are getting more popular in their states for keeping their borders closed," she said. Her theory could help explain why the Queensland Government has joined in on the border wars, despite the importance of domestic tourism to the local economy. More than 10 million holidaymakers spent more than $9.5 billion there last year and its tourism industry wants the borders reopened. Yet today Queensland Tourism Minister Mark Bailey echoed Mr McGowan in saying NSW was in no position to be "lecturing" other states. WA has closed its borders to the east for the first time in history. Here's how you might be affected. "NSW needs to get its act together and get community transmission down, and we will all be better off throughout this nation, including in Queensland," he said. Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk faces an election in just over five months, which Peter Kennedy, Adjunct Professor of politics at Notre Dame University, said was a key factor in her Government's stance. "I think the Labor Government in Queensland does have a close eye on that poll, understandably, and they would be playing to what they believe to be the best interests of Queenslanders and what also would be electorally popular," he said. In the Northern Territory last week, Chief Minister Michael Gunner was keen to remind his citizens that they lived in the "safest place in Australia" as he poured the first beer since pubs reopened last week. In WA, where the rest of Australia is known as "the Eastern States" and Liberal politicians debated a "WAxit" secession motion just three years ago, Mr McGowan has also played to the local crowd. Mr McGowan has claimed WA was being "bullied" by NSW and said he didn't want to be told what to do by a state which allowed the Ruby Princess coronavirus outbreak to occur.  "New South Wales had the Ruby Princess  I mean, seriously? And they are trying to give us advice on our borders, seriously?" he said yesterday. With sky-high approval ratings, he is undoubtedly keen to maintain this domestic support when he contests the next state election in March. "Western Australians don't like being told by other states what to do, but this is one example where our geographic isolation has worked in our favour," Professor Kennedy said. Latest information from the WA Health Department But the state's health experts have been clear public safety is driving the decision-making in WA, which has a relatively low level of coronavirus infections. For this reason, West Australians still can't even travel freely within their state, due to regional border closures, let alone to other parts of the nation. And that's unlikely to change anytime soon. 
Unfair dismissal claims shoot up 70pc amid coronavirus, Fair Work Commission says
Unfair dismissal claims have increased by 70 per cent during the coronavirus crisis, with the Fair Work Commission dealing with an "unprecedented" caseload. The Senate's dedicated COVID-19 inquiry has been grilling public servants in Canberra today, trying to get the latest snapshot of the workforce as the nation continues to grapple with the economic impact of the pandemic. Bernadette O'Neill, general manager of the Fair Work Commission (FWC), said the rate of complaints coming through her agency was "significantly higher than any other period". "Dismissal claims have been reasonably constant over a number of years now," she told the committee. "We have seen a modest increase through the course of this financial year to date. "But what we're seeing at the moment, and the latest figures that I've got, is an increase of more than 70 per cent in unfair dismissal claims. "I think it's fair to say that an explanation clearly is COVID-19." According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, 594,000 Australians lost their job in April as the pandemic squeezed the Australian economy. Given the widespread economic shockwaves caused by the outbreak, and the tough social restrictions which have forced many businesses to close their doors, the FWC believes the figures were not entirely unexpected. "Internal research that we've done, for example, points to a positive correlation between unemployment levels and retrenchment rates and unfair dismissal claims," Ms O'Neill said. Community legal centres had been preparing for an influx in requests for help during the pandemic, expecting an increase in employment and tenancy disputes. A Fair Work Commission spokesperson told the ABC there had been a significant spike in staff and employers contacting the Fair Work Ombudsman about workplace issues arising from the pandemic. During April, more than 75 per cent of COVID-19 calls related to JobKeeper, most of which were from employees. Last month's unemployment figures showed close to 600,000 jobs had been lost since the beginning of the economic downturn. The headline unemployment rate rose to 6.2 per cent, but Treasury Secretary Steven Kennedy told the Senate committee that the real number of people who were out of work was sitting at around 15 per cent. The Commonwealth's JobKeeper wage subsidy program, which came into effect at the beginning of May and is due to operate for six months, has already paid out $8.1 billion to recipients. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. It is estimated the 900,000 businesses that have registered for the JobKeeper program employ more than 6 million staff between them. The Senate committee questioned senior Treasury officials, including secretary Steven Kennedy, about how much Commonwealth support had flowed to Australians doing it tough through the virus-fuelled downturn. More than 1.6 million Australians have made applications to access their superannuation early, and withdrawals have hit $13.2 billion. The Federal Government tweaked the rules for early access to superannuation in cases of financial hardship early on in the coronavirus outbreak. People can access $10,000 this financial year and another $10,000 from July 1. 
Generation Z employees pose dilemma for some employers, and technology is key for retaining younger staff
Grocery outlet owner, Kevin Allen, hired three Generation Z butchery apprentices, none of whom completed their training, before he found 'the one'. Mr Allen said while taking a seminar led by a workplace psychologist, he learnt that Gen Z workers, born from the mid-1990s onwards, were raised in a different technological age from that of their predecessors, the Millennials, born from the mid-80s to the mid-90s. Adopting workplace technology more suitable to his younger workers led to better communication and happier staff, he said. "I've opened up a Messenger account on my phone, and I've got every single employee on the Messenger now, so I can send a message out to them all individually," Mr Allen said Regular team meetings where employees could discuss any challenges they were facing had also helped, he said. "If there's any problems we're all talking about it together," Mr Allen said. "I'm hoping to make my employees happier, which it is, and then it makes my life and my job much easier." Psychologist Danielle Buckley has been providing advice to employers on how to bridge the generational gap with young employees and keep Gen Zs in their jobs. Part of the solution to the challenges created by different generational attitudes, Ms Buckley said, was embracing the role of technology in communicating with  and training  Gen Z employees. And statistics suggest that bridging the generational gap is an ongoing issue for many employers. The number of people choosing to take up apprenticeships and traineeships has plummeted by a third since the Coalition took office, according to data from the Department of Education. According to Apprenticeship Careers Australia general manager, Luke Radford, completion rates for apprenticeships in New South Wales are as low as 45 per cent in some trades, with the hospitality and automotive industries among those struggling the most to keep their young employees. That was why he retained Ms Buckley to offer advice to employers on how to better connect with their young workers. Mr Radford said there were several reasons apprenticeship dropout rates were so high. He said young people were applying for jobs that were available, or that their parents suggested, rather than identifying trades and employers they were best suited to. However, Mr Radford said he also saw the generational gap causing problems between older employers and younger apprentices and trainees, especially when it came to technology. "Most of the communication that young people do is via apps or via different text messages and the like," he said. "We spend a lot of time communicating via text rather than phone calls, because they don't pick up our phone calls; they communicate via text to us." Beyond the difference in technological uptake, Ms Buckley said the current Generation Z apprentices had a different mindset from that of Millennials. "Unlike the earlier generation, the Millennials, who grew up with the emergence of technology, our Gen Zs have been raised with technology in the palm of their hand," she said. You don't have to have been born between 1946 and 1964 to feel confused about the "OK boomer" phenomenon. Here's how the phrase went all over the internet. "Because of that they've got so much access to information and platforms.  "And this really informs the way that they are, the way they think and the things they believe." According to Ms Buckley, this access to information has led to a generation of young people that wants to build meaningful relationships and work in a way that helps solve problems that the world is facing, from climate change to terrorism. Ms Buckley said Generation Z also had a desire for stability that was different to the generation before it. "Us psychologists say they [Millennials] grew up in the world of the self-esteem movement of parenting where your parents said, 'You can be anything, the world's your oyster'," she said. "But now we're seeing kids today faced with [real-world problems]  I mean look at what's gone down in the world in the last 12 months. "We've had floods, we've had fires, we've got the coronavirus going around the world as well." Another important component to apprenticeship success is making sure that the values of the employer and employee are well-matched, Ms Buckley said. "Everybody is different, and we want businesses to start thinking about, not just 'I want an apprentice', but what sort of person and what sort of culture do you want your business to have," he said. "What we're seeing with young people, particularly Gen Z, is that they want organisations or businesses who match their values  we've seen this more and more. "We saw recently some bands who have said 'no' to playing different concerts because of the carbon footprint they're creating, and I think this really highlights some of the attitudes of young people today." 
Donald Trump's campaign sues New York Times for libel over Russia opinion piece
President Donald Trump's re-election campaign is filing a libel suit accusing the New York Times of intentionally publishing a false opinion article that suggested Russia and the campaign had an overarching deal in the 2016 US election. In an escalation of the Republican President's long-running battle with the news media, campaign officials said the lawsuit was being filed in state court in New York. Asked about the lawsuit at a White House news conference Mr Trump said the Times had "got a lot wrong over the last number of years". Mr Trump said he would let the lawsuit "work its way through the courts. And there'll be more coming". A campaign statement said the aim of the suit against the Times, among the most prominent American news organisations, was to hold the newspaper "accountable for intentionally publishing false statements against President Trump's campaign." There are five main takeaways from Robert Mueller's report on Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election. The lawsuit relates to a March 27, 2019, opinion article written by Max Frankel, who served as executive editor of the Times from 1986 to 1994. A draft copy of the suit, attached to a campaign news release, accused the newspaper of "extreme bias against and animosity toward the campaign", and cited what it called the Times' "exuberance to improperly influence the presidential election in November 2020". Mr Trump is seeking re-election on November 3. In a statement, a New York Times spokesperson said: "The Trump campaign has turned to the courts to try to punish an opinion writer for having an opinion they find unacceptable. "Fortunately, the law protects the right of Americans to express their judgments and conclusions, especially about events of public importance. We look forward to vindicating that right in this case." The newspaper's spokesperson said it had not been served with the suit and learned about it through media reports. Mr Trump's criticism of what he calls liberal bias in the US news media plays well with his conservative political base and often generates applause at his political rallies where his supporters often jeer journalists.  Mr Trump often refers to various news media outlets as "fake news" and has called elements of the US news media "the enemy of the American people". The New York Times was involved in a landmark 1964 Supreme Court ruling that has served as a safeguard for media reporting on public figures.  In the case New York Times v Sullivan, the court decided that the US Constitution's First Amendment protection for freedom of the press allows even statements that are false to be published as long as the publication was not done with "actual malice". The suit, according to the draft copy released by the campaign, accused the newspaper of a "malicious motive" and "reckless disregard for the truth". Benjamin Zipursky, a professor at Fordham University School of Law, said the lawsuit was unlikely to succeed because US defamation law does not allow liability for a sincerely held belief about a public figure, like Mr Trump. He said judges would be sceptical of the claims and inclined to dismiss them. "They're going to be very concerned with the First Amendment implications of allowing a case like this to move forward," he said. Senator Bernie Sanders, the front-runner in the race for the Democratic nomination to face Mr Trump in the November election, denounced the lawsuit. "Trump has called the press the 'enemy of the people,' and now  taking a page from his dictator friends around the world  is trying to dismantle the right to a free press in the First Amendment by suing the New York Times for publishing an opinion column about his dangerous relationship with Russia," Mr Sanders said. Former special counsel Robert Mueller documented Moscow's campaign of hacking and social media propaganda to boost Mr Trump's 2016 candidacy and harm his Democratic opponent Hillary Clinton. It documented numerous contacts between people associated with Mr Trump's campaign and Russians. Mr Mueller found insufficient evidence to show a criminal conspiracy between Mr Trump's team and Russia but did not exonerate Mr Trump of obstruction of justice related to the investigation. In the opinion piece, Mr Frankel stated: "Collusion  or a lack of it  turns out to have been the rhetorical trap that ensnared President Trump's pursuers." Mr Frankel added: "There was no need for detailed electoral collusion between the Trump campaign and Vladimir Putin's oligarchy because they had an overarching deal: the quid of help in the campaign against Hillary Clinton for the quo of a new pro-Russian foreign policy, starting with relief from the Obama administration's burdensome economic sanctions. The Trumpites knew about the quid and held out the prospect of the quo." These are main characters in Robert Mueller's investigation into Russian meddling in the 2016 Presidential election, and any charges they face (or have faced). Quid pro quo is a Latin term meaning a favour in exchange for a favour. Mr Trump in January 2018 criticised US defamation laws as "a sham and a disgrace" following publication of a book by author Michael Wolff called Fire and Fury: Inside the Trump White House, which among other things questioned the President's mental health. Conservative Justice Clarence Thomas last year urged his Supreme Court colleagues to consider overturning the New York Times v Sullivan precedent. In a statement on the suit, Jenna Ellis, senior legal adviser to Mr Trump's campaign, said: "The statements were and are 100 per cent false and defamatory." "The complaint alleges the Times was aware of the falsity at the time it published them, but did so for the intentional purpose of hurting the campaign, while misleading its own readers in the process." Reuters 
Six dead in Milwaukee shooting as employee opens fire at Molson Coors brewery complex
An employee has opened fire at Milwaukee's Molson Coors brewing complex, killing five fellow workers before taking his own life, police said. The gunman was identified as a 51-year-old Milwaukee man. Police said the bloodshed was confined to the brewing facility, and that "no members of the general public were involved". Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett said it was an "unspeakable tragedy" for the city. "There were five individuals who went to work today, just like everybody goes to work, and they thought they were going to go to work, finish their day and return to their families. They didn't  and tragically they never will," he said. "It is a horrible, horrible day for the employees here. It's a very rough day for anyone who is close to this situation," he added. US President Donald Trump addressed the shooting before speaking at the White House with reporters about steps his administration is taking to combat the coronavirus.  "Our hearts break for them and their loved ones," the President said.  "We send our condolences. We'll be with them, and it's a terrible thing, a terrible thing." Wisconsin Lieutenant Governor Mandela Barnes said it was the scene of "another American tragedy". "A senseless American tragedy, and one that shouldn't have had to happen," Mr Barnes said. Authorities did not immediately release details about the shooter or how the shooting unfolded. Molson Coors CEO Gavin Hattersley called the shooter "an active brewery employee". "Unfortunately, I am devastated to share that we lost five other members of our family in this tragic incident," he said in an email sent to employees. "There are no words to express the deep sadness many of us are feeling right now." "We are all a family. We work a lot of hours together, so we're all very sad," said Selena Curka, a brewery employee who was about to start her shift when the complex went on lockdown and she was turned away. "It's just weird, because nine times out of 10 you're going to know the shooter," said employee Thomas Milner.  "It's a tight-knit family. Within the brewery, we all interact with each other." At least 600 people work at the complex, which is widely known in the Milwaukee area as "Miller Valley", a reference to the Miller Brewing Company that is now part of Molson Coors. A massive red Miller sign towers over the complex and is a well-known symbol in Milwaukee. ABC/Wires 
Government rules out recommendation by Productivity Commission to axe remote-area tax concessions
The Federal Government has swiftly rejected recommendations from the Productivity Commission to axe the special tax concession for people living in remote parts of Australia. A report from the Productivity Commission released this week said the concessions were outdated, inequitable and poorly-designed. But Assistant Treasurer Michael Sukkar quickly ruled out any changes and moved to calm fears. "Were they to be implemented, the Productivity Commission's recommendations would result in significant disruption to existing arrangements," Minister Sukkar said in a statement. "Given the challenges faced by regional Australia, including as a result of the impacts of the recent drought, bushfires and now Coronavirus, the Government will not be acting on the Productivity Commission's recommendations. "The most important thing we can do at this time is continue to provide certainty and confidence to those living in regional areas that the Government remains fully committed to supporting the growth of our regions and their continued success into the future." The report looked at the effects of the zone tax offset, remote area allowance and remote area concessions for fringe benefits tax on people and businesses in remote areas. It recommended abolishing the Zone Tax Offset (ZTO), a benefit of around $300 a year to help compensate for the higher cost of living in remote areas.  The move would save the Federal Government about $150 million a year. The commission argued that the concession was "poorly targeted" with almost half the claimants living in large cities such as Townsville, Cairns, Darwin and Mackay. If it were to be kept, it recommended limiting it to only "very remote areas".  It also wanted the government to review the Regional Area Allowance, a supplementary payment for income support recipients. But it was the proposed changes to Fringe Benefits Tax remote area concessions which generated the most angst in remote areas like the Pilbara in Western Australia. The Commission said the government was forgoing up to $390 million in tax revenue a year because employer-provided housing was exempt from Fringe Benefits Tax, and this should be reduced to only a 50 per cent concession. Queensland LNP Senator Susan McDonald said the concessions were hugely important to regional Australia and the report showed a lack of understanding of life in the bush. "The Fringe Benefits Tax concessions are crucial for businesses in remote and rural Australia who provide accommodation to employees as part of their salary packages," she said in a statement. "Without these concessions, small outback businesses will not be able to attract workers." State Labor Member for the Pilbara Kevin Michel described the report as "a kick in the guts for regional residents".  "I'm totally disappointed with the Productivity Commission report. People don't seem to understand the cost of living up here in the Pilbara. "It recognises the current zone allowances aren't working properly and the inequalities that we face living in the region need to be fixed. "But at the same time it recommends abolishing the tax rebate, rather than trying to fix these inequalities. "The Commission should actually be asking for more tax concessions for people living in the Pilbara. "Living up here is not easy." WA Regional Affairs Minister Alannah MacTiernan said the fringe benefits tax housing exemption was vital in attracting workers the region. "The Pilbara is a major generator of wealth for the entire country and the fringe benefits tax exemption is indeed one of those things that is at least helping to create some balance, and going part way to addressing the problem of fly-in fly-out [workers]," she said. Shire of East Pilbara chief executive officer, Jeremy Edwards, said the council was very disappointed in the recommendations. "If the recommendations were implemented, it would have a huge financial impact on a shire like the Shire of East Pilbara," he said "The introduction of a 50 per cent rate for FBT on housing would cost the Shire $300,000 to $400,000 a year. "For a shire like ours we have to provide employee housing to attract people to come to this region and to put FTB on top of that would be a huge cost," he said. "To attract people to the regions, you do need to incentivise.  "Having a blanket statement that people want to move to the regions for lifestyle choices is true, but for somewhere like the Shire of East Pilbara and Newman we don't have a waterfront view, and it is really difficult. "So the remote area tax concessions and some of the incentives for people to live in the area is really warranted and it's needed to keep people in the regions." Mr Edwards said he is hopeful the proposal is gone for good. "It scared us a little bit, we are still going to advocate through our local members, and also Senator Dean Smith, we've spoken to him in relation to it," he said. "So we are just going to keep the pressure on and make sure the government doesn't implement something like this. "The news was welcome, but we just hope it doesn't come back and haunt us in the future." 
Taiwan is standing up as an independent nation. But China won't make it easy
It's a vibrant democracy with a population roughly the size of Australia's, yet few Aussies could name its capital, let alone its newly re-elected female president. Fewer still have visited, despite the fact it's closer to our shores than Japan or America. By almost any measure Taiwan is a success story. Its population is highly educated and its annual GDP is greater than that of the Netherlands, Sweden or Norway. It has a strong manufacturing and electronics base  if you own an iPhone or an Xbox One, your device was made in a factory run by Foxconn, the giant Taiwanese electronics firm. Taiwan has a free and robust media environment, an extensive catalogue of national parks, a vibrant cultural sector, good food and world-class infrastructure. It also has strong progressive credentials: 42 per cent of legislators are women; six seats in the national parliament are reserved for indigenous representatives; it's the only Asian nation to have legislated same-sex marriage. On paper Taiwan reads like a model global citizen. But while it has many trading partners, it has very few international friends  at least, not ones prepared to stand beside it publicly. It's been decades since any Western leader has formally hosted a dinner for their Taiwanese counterpart, let alone arranged a joint photo opportunity. Despite it being a strategic US ally, America has no official embassy in the Taiwanese capital Taipei  nor does Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom or Germany. Taiwan is the sort of "friend" you're happy to chat with at a dimly lit party, just as long as no-one posts a photo of the two of you on Facebook. Taiwan's problem is that it lives in the shadow cast by its giant neighbour, the People's Republic of China (PRC). For decades China has run a concerted and successful diplomatic campaign to isolate and prostrate the Taiwanese nation. China holds one of the five permanent seats on the UN Security Council, giving it veto rights over all significant UN decisions. As a result, Taiwan finds itself in the unique position of being the only economically advanced, first-world country barred from membership of the United Nations and all other major international organisations. But a clear majority of Taiwanese are now demanding greater international recognition  even at the risk of turning their island into a battlefield. And there's a growing sense that China may have overplayed its hand. The Chinese Communist Party claims ownership of the island on two grounds. The first involves the ethnic make-up of the Taiwanese population. It's overwhelmingly Han  around 97 per cent. The second is based on the fact that Taiwan was once part of the Great Qing empire. In the 1950s Mao Zedong's red armies moved to conquer all lost Imperial possessions and bring them under Communist rule. That included Tibet and Xinjiang. But his troops failed to take Taiwan which, at the end of the brutal Chinese civil war, had become the last outpost of the former Nationalist government and its supporters. Ever since, Beijing has labelled Taiwan a "renegade province", ignoring the historic fact that Taiwan was never a part of the People's Republic of China and has functioned as an independent political entity for seven decades. For China's President Xi Jinping, Taiwan also represents a personal political inconvenience. "It puts the lie to the Chinese Communist Party notion that Chinese culture, Chinese civilisation, does not accord with democracy," says the American Enterprise Institute's Michael Mazza. "It acts as a potential shining light on the hill for people in China who are interested in a freer future." But why have Western countries allowed Taiwan to be isolated? In the early 1970s the governments of both Taiwan (then a dictatorship) and the PRC refused to accept each other's legitimacy. Each claimed sovereignty over both sides of the Taiwan Strait.  Eventually recognition of the PRC's size and potential military might won the day and Taipei lost its seat at the UN to its rival. But Macquarie University's Roger Lee Huang says there's another major factor at play when it comes to any attempt to formally bring Taiwan back into the international fold. "Clearly Australia is very reliant on the Chinese economy," says Dr Huang, who once worked for the Democratic Progressive Party in Taiwan. "With China being Australia's largest trading partner Australia has been very cautious with anything related to China. Taiwan clearly is one of the big issues there." After 36 years of ties, Solomon Islands ended relations with Taiwan. What did it cost Beijing to win over the Pacific nation's old friend, and what might it mean for stability in the region? And Beijing has not been reticent in making its displeasure known when any nation attempts to improve its relations with Taipei. "Taiwan and Australia were actually pretty close to creating a free-trade agreement a couple of years ago and China actively intervened and basically told Australia to stop," Dr Huang says. Dr Huang says there's also been a concerted campaign by Beijing to remove any reference to Taiwanese sovereignty from world affairs. At major sporting events, for instance, Taiwanese teams are forbidden to compete under their own name. Hence, when the Matildas recently played an Olympic qualifier against Taiwan, the Taiwanese national team was euphemistically referred to as "Chinese Taipei". In 2018 the Chinese Communist Party was also successful in forcing more than 40 international airlines, including Qantas, to change their naming protocols so that Taiwan would be identified as a Chinese territory not an independent nation. Despite the pressure, Taiwan has survived and thrived. In the third quarter of 2019, the island nation jumped ahead of both Singapore and South Korea to record an economic growth rate of 2.9 per cent. What's most apparent when visiting Taiwan is how ordinary it is  ordinary in the sense of normal, everyday, functional. Unlike in mainland China, the police and military don't maintain a high public profile. During January's national election campaign there was no obvious sense of heightened security. In fact, campaigning often had a distinctly carnival feeling to it, with candidates using loud hailers, flashing lights and music to attract attention as they drove through the streets of Taipei in open vehicles. The election marked a significant turning point in Taiwan's democratic development with a record 57 per cent of the electorate voting overwhelmingly for Tsai Ing-wen's Democratic Progressive Party, giving her a second term. In so doing, they rejected the main opposition party, the Kuomintang (KMT), which was widely seen by analysts as being far more pro-Beijing. "The KMT must convince the general public that it only engages the mainland for the purposes of creating peace, and that it would never sell out Taiwan," senior party figure Chang Ya-chung acknowledged in a radio interview after the event. Dr Tsai consistently campaigned on the need for Taiwan to be less reliant on economic relations with mainland China (its major trading partner, despite the tensions) and to broaden its trade arrangements with other Asian democracies like Japan and South Korea. Professor Frank Cheng-shan Liu, from Taiwan's National Sun Yat-Sen University, says while that proved persuasive with the electorate, voters were also influenced by the solidarity and concern they felt for the pro-democracy protestors in Hong Kong. "Taiwanese people don't ignore the market potential of mainland China, but last summer changed a lot of people's perspectives," he says. Beijing has long talked about forcing Taiwan to become part of China under a Hong Kong-style "one country, two systems" arrangement, but the heavy-handed way in which protesters were dealt with in Hong Kong made Taiwanese voters uneasy, according to Professor Liu. "The Hong Kong situation actually shrank the people's positive belief that economic opportunities [with China] are the priority," he says. January's election also confirmed the existence of a demographic shift in the way ordinary Taiwanese see themselves and their national identity. Previous generations of Taiwanese, especially those who fled the mainland in the late 1940s to escape Communist rule, still saw themselves as essentially Chinese. But young people today, says Professor Liu, now identify overwhelmingly as "Taiwanese" not Chinese. "President Tsai reflected very well the new consensus to include Taiwan in their identity," he says. "To attract the younger generation's belief that she is the protector of Taiwan." Dr Huang believes Beijing may have underestimated the intelligence and political skill of the quietly-spoken Dr Tsai, a seasoned campaigner who holds a doctorate from the London School of Economics. While Beijing regularly threatens war and accuses Taiwan's leadership of being reckless separatists, she has been measured in her criticism of Beijing. In her election night speech Dr Tsai spoke of the need to make peace, parity, democracy and dialogue the watchwords of all future Beijing-Taipei relations. "Positive cross-strait interactions founded in mutual respect are the best way to serve our peoples," she said. "All countries should consider Taiwan a partner, not an issue." In an interview with the BBC several days after the election she was specifically asked about Beijing's threat of conflict if she and her government move to declare formal independence. In her response, she turned the proposition on its head. "We don't have a need to declare ourselves an independent state," she replied.  "We are an independent country already. We have a separate identity and we're a country of our own. We deserve respect from China." China's Government has made little effort to conceal its dislike of Taiwan's President Tsai Ing-wen, and her landslide re-election is a massive blow to Xi Jinping, writes Bill Birtles. Dr Huang argues Xi Jinping's aggressive and highly-nationalistic style of politics may now be backfiring. Broadly speaking, he says, the international community has learnt not to trust the Chinese government, pointing to events in Hong Kong as well as recent concerns over the PRC's handling of the current coronavirus outbreak. "I think China might have overplayed its hand in the last couple of years," he says. And he argues this month's visit to Washington by Taiwan's vice-president elect, William Lai Ching-te, could be emblematic of a nascent shift in global sentiment. "Traditional allies and friends of Taiwan, countries that obviously share similar values, are now finally awakening again," he says. Although unofficial, Mr Lai attended various events and met with many senior political figures including the powerful Speaker of the House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi. And there are other tentative signs of a global warming toward Taiwan. In response to concerns over the spread of the coronavirus, both the prime ministers of Japan and Canada publicly voiced their support for Taiwan's inclusion in the World Health Organisation. Professor Liu believes a lot will depend on how skilfully Dr Tsai manages the growing national assertiveness of the Taiwanese people. Dr Tsai has spoken openly about the pressure she's felt from elements within her party who want her to now go further in asserting the country's sovereignty. Professor Liu worries that tensions could escalate if politicians on both sides of the Taiwan Strait can't compromise. But Dr Huang doubts Beijing wants war. "The party's main concern remains political stability in China," he says. "If the People's Liberation Army can't deliver a decisive, quick victory this will most likely weaken the CCP's legitimacy within China." In the US, both sides of politics have reaffirmed their commitment to ensuring the Taiwanese military is well armed and prepared for any possible Chinese incursion. How the wider international community would respond to cross-strait conflict remains unclear. The Chinese military has tested waters in recent months by sending a jet fighter briefly into Taiwanese airspace and by undertaking two separate naval convoys through the Taiwan Strait. But it's worth noting that for all her talk of peace, Dr Tsai has been unequivocal in stating her administration's attitude to war. "Invading Taiwan is something that will be very costly for China," she told the BBC. "Maintaining a 'status quo' remains our policy. I think that is a very friendly gesture to China." Get more stories that go beyond the news cycle with our weekly newsletter. 
Tesla criticised for lack of Autopilot safeguards after Apple engineer playing on phone dies
Tesla's Autopilot driving system steered an electric vehicle into a concrete barrier on a California freeway in a fatal 2018 crash because it was operating under conditions it could not handle, a US investigation has found. The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) also ruled that the car's driver, an engineer for Apple, was distracted by playing a game on his iPhone. The NTSB made the findings on Tuesday and provided nine recommendations to prevent crashes of partially automated vehicles in the future.  Among them was that technology companies design smartphones so they do not operate if they are within a driver's reach, apart from cases of emergency. The hearing in Washington DC focused on the March 2018 crash of a Tesla Model X SUV that killed engineer Walter Huang. The 38-year-old was playing a game on his iPhone rather than holding the steering wheel. Autopilot was engaged when the vehicle swerved and slammed into a concrete barrier dividing freeway and exit lanes at a speed of 113 kilometres per hour. Drivers can avoid holding the steering wheel for extended periods while using Autopilot, but Tesla recommends keeping hands on the wheel and paying attention. The board criticised Tesla in its findings, saying that if it did not add driver-monitoring safeguards, misuse of Autopilot was expected "and the risk for future crashes will remain". The NTSB can only make recommendations, while the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) regulates US vehicles. It said it would carefully review the recommendations. The NHTSA has opened investigations into 14 Tesla crashes in which Autopilot is suspected of being in use, but has taken no action against the company. "It's time to stop enabling drivers in any partially automated vehicle to pretend that they have driverless cars. Because they don't have driverless cars," NTSB chairman Robert Sumwalt said. According to the NTSB, regulators place limitations on Autopilot use in Europe where Tesla issues alerts for hands-off driving within 15 seconds. Tesla, whose Autopilot has been tied to at least three fatal crashes since 2016, did not respond to requests for comment. The company has previously said the system was put out initially in "beta," meaning it was being tested and improved as bugs were identified, the NTSB was told. Mr Sumwalt said Tesla  unlike five other car manufacturers  had ignored NTSB safety recommendations issued in 2017. The NTSB said it would soon release a review of a Tesla Autopilot fatal crash in March 2019 in Florida that showed no evidence the driver's hands were on the steering wheel in the final eight seconds before the car struck a truck. Mr Sumwalt added that the problem of driver distraction due to smartphones would keep spreading if nothing was done.  "If we don't get on top of it, it's going to be a coronavirus," Mr Sumwalt said. AP/Reuters 
Underemployment in Australia is on the rise and it may only get worse, experts say
Desiree Sheets-Chavolla works as a cleaner at Sydney Airport. She currently does an average of 26 hours a week but would like to work more. "I'm constantly having to ask for extra work," she told 7.30. "They've created like a shark tank for us  we have to fight for any overtime." Ms Sheets-Chavolla is not alone. Exclusive market research for 7.30 shows almost 1.2 million people were underemployed last year and the problem is only predicted to get worse. Roy Morgan Research analysed 15 years of research and found the number of underemployed people had jumped almost 450,000 since 2005. The research is based on thousands of face-to-face interviews conducted across the country each month. CEO Michele Levine said an increasing number of workers were frustrated about being trapped in part-time work. "Essentially what they're saying is they've got a part-time job, but they would really like to be working more hours," she told 7.30. "Part-time jobs are growing at a faster rate than full-time jobs. And clearly, when you have part-time jobs, you have a lot of those people would prefer to have more work, they'd prefer to have a full-time job." According to the Roy Morgan research, 8.7 per cent of the workforce is underemployed, slightly higher than the Australian Bureau of Statistics' (ABS) official figure of 8.5 per cent. And you are more likely to be underemployed if you are a woman, a worker in your teens or 20s, or you work in three industries where part-time work is common. The recreation and personal sector, which includes hospitality and fitness workers, is the industry with the highest underemployment, at 20 per cent, followed closely by retail with over 19 per cent underemployment, and community services, which includes teachers and carers, at 10.5 per cent. For Ms Sheets-Chavolla, the lack of work makes it difficult to make ends meet. "I struggle to pay my bills, I struggle to pay my mortgage," she said. That means she puts off fixing essentials like her broken hot water heater which is leaking water. Despite a 50-kilometre commute to the airport for shifts as short as four hours, Ms Sheets-Chavolla has taken on a second cleaning job but says it isn't enough to fill the financial shortfall. "It doesn't come easy because you're always robbing from Peter to pay Paul and you're always waiting for that next payday and its very stressful," she said. Roy Morgan's Ms Levine said the economy would benefit from people having extra work if they wanted it. "We're under-utilising the potential of our people to be doing meaningful work," she said. "That in itself is a bad thing, that holds the economy back. "If more people were actually working and working as many hours as they wanted to, they'd have more money to spend, and that of course, feeds the economy." The ABS uses a strict definition to calculate its unemployment and underemployment statistics so that it can compare Australia's results with that of other countries. A person is counted as being employed if they work one hour a week. Ndonde Fikiri enjoys her part-time in retail but she wants to work more. Her shifts can be as short as three hours. "A three-hour shift, that's like barely $50," she told 7.30. "Sometimes it takes about $6 to go and come back from work. It's just not enough." She has been going door-to-door to retail outlets, handing out her resume in a search for more work. She's not having much luck. "Only one of the retailers accepted my resume," she said. "[The search] continues." Ms Fikiri is trying to save enough to pay for a business degree at university. "I have to pay for my own uni, and I just can't sit around and wait, getting three-hour shifts per day." "How am I ever going to pay $4,000 a semester? I need a job." According to Jeff Borland, a professor of economics at the University of Melbourne, there has been a significant shift to part-time work over decades, which is causing the spike in underemployment. "Underemployment really is a part-time work phenomenon," he told 7.30. "Back in the mid-1960s, for example, only about 10 per cent of jobs were part-time then and the rate of underemployment was 1 per cent. "So, only one in 100 workers in the labour force then said that they were underemployed. "Nowadays with part-time employment, it's about a third of the labour force." He said even the well-educated were finding it harder to land full-time work. "Whereas 10-15 years ago, if you had a degree and wanted a full-time job, you're pretty likely to get that straight away, now it's about a quarter of people who get a graduate degree, three months after they graduate are doing part-time work, and it's taking them several years to get the full-time job they want." Professor Borland predicts underemployment is likely to get worse, particularly after hits to the economy from this summer's bushfire and the coronavirus outbreak. He said the Morrison Government should look at budget stimulus to try and combat the issue. "The signs are that part-time employment will continue to grow," he said. "If you extrapolate past trends and taking account of the likelihood of some weakening in the Australian economy, it is quite likely that underemployment will continue to rise." For airport worker Desiree Sheets-Chavolla, underemployment is a worrying trend that makes her worry about the future for her children. "It's grim. You know, it's sad to see that that's where this world is going," she said. "We want to make it better in the future. "We want people to have full-time jobs and it's just not going that way." 
China jails Hong Kong bookseller Gui Minhai for 10 years in case which has caused diplomatic rift with Sweden
A Chinese court has sentenced Chinese-born Swedish citizen Gui Minhai to 10 years in jail for illegally providing intelligence overseas, prompting a protest from Stockholm. Gui, a bookseller previously based in Hong Kong who sold books critical of China's political leadership, was detained by mainland police in 2018.  He was seized while with Swedish diplomats on a Beijing-bound train. Relations between Sweden and China soured in the months leading up to the sentencing, with Chinese officials warning Swedish counterparts against meddling in China's internal affairs. Sweden summoned the Chinese ambassador to Stockholm to protest against the sentence and demand Gui's release. "We have summoned China's ambassador to our cabinet secretary and again demanded the release of, and consular access to, our citizen," a foreign ministry spokesman told Reuters. Swedish Foreign Minister Ann Linde said Gui should be released, a position Sweden has held throughout. "We also require access to our citizen to provide the consular support he is entitled to," Ms Linde said. "We have not had access to or knowledge of any trial. Thus, we have not been able to review the indictment nor been able to offer access to legal counsel," she said. A statement by the Ningbo Intermediate People's Court, which jailed Gui, said the 55-year-old had stated that he would not appeal the sentence and had asked to have his Chinese citizenship reinstated. A spokesman for China's foreign ministry told a news briefing that Gui's rights and interests had been fully guaranteed. He said consular visits, in general, were put on hold due to the coronavirus outbreak. Chinese officials objected to Svenska PEN, a literary organisation, awarding Gui the 2019 Tucholsky Prize, praising his services to free speech. The complicated conflict broken down in simple terms to help you get a handle on what's going on  Swedish Culture Minister Amanda Lind defied Chinese diplomatic threats of "countermeasures" to present the prize. Gui is the highest-profile of five booksellers who disappeared between October and December 2015, all linked to a Hong Kong bookshop known for its gossipy texts on Chinese political leaders. Such books are banned on the mainland but their production and sale are legal in Hong Kong under freedoms guaranteed as part of the 1997 handover from British colonial rule to Chinese sovereignty. Gui was initially abducted in the Thai beach resort of Pattaya in 2015 before surfacing, like the others, in detention in mainland China.  He was released in October 2017, before being arrested in January 2018. Three of his colleagues were detained in mainland China while another was widely thought to have been abducted in Hong Kong and spirited across the border. Gui is the only one to have remained in detention. His daughter Angela, along with other supporters, has repeatedly called for his release, saying he is a victim of illegal political persecution.  Reuters 
Greta Thunberg says EU is 'pretending' to tackle climate change crisis
Climate activist Greta Thunberg has accused European Union governments and institutions of only "pretending" to urgently tackle the climate crisis. EU leaders say they are spearheading some of the most ambitious climate change policies in the world, and on Wednesday the bloc's executive unveiled a planned climate law to reduce net greenhouse gas emissions to zero by 2050. "When your house is on fire, you don't wait a few more years to start putting it out," Ms Thunberg told the European Parliament's environment committee. "And yet this is what the [European] Commission is proposing today." The 17-year-old Swedish activist said that, by fixing its climate law around an emissions target three decades in the future, the EU was ignoring reality. Greta Thunberg inspired a global movement for climate action, but some haven't welcomed her message. "Here you are, trying to create laws and policies once again ignoring it. Pretending that your plan or policy disregarding the united science will somehow solve the biggest crisis humanity has ever faced," she said. "Pretending that a law that no one has to follow  is a law. Pretending that you can be a climate leader and still go on building and subsidising new fossil fuel infrastructure," Ms Thunberg said, drawing applause from European lawmakers. The climate law would give the executive Commission powers to set tougher goals for governments every five years. But these powers would only kick in after 2030  too late, according to environment groups. "We will not be satisfied with anything less than a science-based pathway which gives us the best possible chance to safeguard the future living conditions for humanity and life on earth as we know it," Ms Thunberg said. The EU accounts for less than 10 per cent of the world's greenhouse gas emissions. But Ms Thunberg said the bloc had a moral obligation to lead the way, because developed economies that have been polluting for longest should cut emissions first and fastest. The European Parliament has banned external visitors for the next three weeks as a precaution against the fast-spreading coronavirus, but waived its own rule for Ms Thunberg's visit. Ms Thunberg is in Brussels this week to meet EU leaders and lead a climate school strike on Friday. "For over one-and-a-half years we have been sacrificing our education to protest against your inaction," Ms Thunberg said. She began missing school in 2018 to sit outside the Swedish parliament in a solitary protest. Since then, Ms Thunberg has galvanised a global movement of young people, inspiring millions to take to the streets to demand that world leaders act urgently to tackle the climate crisis. Reuters/AP 
There is a chance today's GDP number could signal Australia is already in recession
Australia's economy is facing some of its biggest threats in a generation. This time last year the economy was already struggling. Business activity outside the mining sector was sluggish at best and shoppers were reluctant to spend at the stores. Years of low wage growth, high levels of personal debt and job insecurity were already taking a toll. Fast forward to the end of the year and add to that a severe drought, a disastrous bushfire season and rising unemployment, and you have an economy slowing down to a worryingly low pace. That's why when the threat of a pandemic hit global headlines, share markets sold off  companies looking for higher profits in a sluggish economy were forced to completely overhaul their earnings guidance. Today's GDP data won't factor in the threat of the spread of the coronavirus and its impact on business and the economy, but it will highlight how vulnerable the economy was late last year before it was hit with the threat of a pandemic. Let's look at some of the key components of GDP leading into today's national accounts release. Australia relies heavily on international trade for economic growth. According to the Bureau of Statistics, the current account surplus, seasonally adjusted, fell by 85 per cent to $955 million in the December quarter 2019. This shows Australia's trade position deteriorated materially towards the end of last year. NAB's chief economist Alan Oster told the ABC's PM program this was a "reflection of lower commodities prices and lower demand for exports". Net exports and government spending were both expected to contribute less than expected to GDP in the December quarter, said AMP Capital's chief economist Shane Oliver. "Net exports and public demand [government spending] are each expected to contribute a smaller-than-expected 0.1 percentage points to December quarter GDP growth," he said. Shoppers and consumer spending generate the bulk of economic growth. But Australian retail turnover fell 0.5 percentage points in December 2019. This follows a rise of 1 per cent in November 2019, said Ben James, the director of Quarterly Economy Wide Surveys at the ABS. "The December fall comes after a strong November, led by Black Friday sales," he said. The outlook for the first quarter of this year, according to economists, is for more tight purse strings. Spending by businesses has also been lacklustre. Businesses spending on equipment, plant and machinery rose 0.8 per cent in the December quarter. Spending on new factories and building was quite poor though, down 5.9 per cent. Businesses remain reluctant to spend and certainly do not possess the "animal spirits" the Reserve Bank governor, Philip Lowe said he wants to see. Ahead of the GDP announcement, three of Australia's leading economists shared their views on where the economy was heading. Mr Oster said the December quarter would see "moderate growth, but not great". He expected GDP growth to come in at a very modest 0.3 percentage points. He said the economy should start to improve by April but "all our data suggests that things are getting worse". NAB said there was now an increased chance of a recession in 2020. However, Mr Oliver was more pessimistic. "We have revised down our December quarter GDP growth forecast to zero or 1.6 per cent year on year (from plus 0.3 quarter on quarter)," he wrote in a note. "There is a risk that it could be negative, even before the bushfires and coronavirus likely knocked the economy backwards in the current quarter." This would mean, assuming the current quarter sees a contraction in economic growth, that Australia's economy is currently in recession. A technical recession is defined as two consecutive quarters of negative GDP growth. Chances of a recession were increasing, according to BIS Oxford Economics chief economist Sarah Hunter. "Definitely much higher now than they were two weeks ago," she said. "The probability of a recession this year is definitely higher and increasing as the [coronavirus] outbreak spreads to more parts of the world and doesn't show any signs of slowing." 
Spotlight to buy collapsed retail chain Harris Scarfe
Collapsed department store chain Harris Scarfe has found a buyer in the Spotlight Group, but the future of its remaining stores and staff remains unclear. The 170-year-old retailer called in the administrators in December, just a month after it was acquired by private equity firm Allegro Funds. The number of Harris Scarfe stores has been reduced from 66 to 44 in the months since, and job cuts reduced employee numbers from more than 1,800 to around 1,300. The coronavirus outbreak is expected to cost the Australian economy billions, with the second-order impact to be felt across supply chains, as many factories remain closed in China. Receivers from Deloitte Restructuring Services have granted the Spotlight group exclusive rights to buy the business, after four parties were shortlisted. The Spotlight Group runs the eponymous chain of fabric and craft stores, as well as camping and outdoor brands Mountain Designs and Anaconda. The receivers said they were "seeking to secure the ongoing employment" of the remaining staff members. "We are hopeful all of the 44 stores will be retained under the sale but ultimately, this will be dependent on how the transaction progresses over the next couple of weeks," receiver Vaughan Strawbridge said. Harris Scarfe is one of a growing list of retail casualties in recent months, including accessories brand Colette and clothing chains Jeanswest and Bardot, which all shut down some of their stores after entering administration. After closing a quarter of its stores and making more than 260 employees redundant, Jeanswest was last week sold to Harbour Guidance, the subsidiary of a Hong Kong company run by the same family that previously owned it. The already-struggling retail sector has had a tough start to the year, with a horror bushfire season impacting domestic travel and spending in fire-affected areas and the coronavirus outbreak disrupting supply chains. The latest ANZ-Roy Morgan survey showed consumer confidence fell 3.2 per cent last week, to be at its lowest in more than five years. "The virus-induced sell-off in the local and global stock markets and the big drop in [Chinese manufacturing] likely contributed to the weakness," ANZ's head of Australian economics David Plank said. Respondents' views of current economic conditions dropped sharply, by more than 16 per cent, but there was more positivity around personal finances. "So far the negative economic outlook has been a better guide to household spending than more positive financial sentiment," Mr Plank said. The receivers for Harris Scarfe said they expected to finalise the sale to Spotlight as early as mid-April. 
Olympic champion Mo Farah faces renewed doping suspicions following British TV investigation
As the coronavirus works its way across the globe, the possibility that the Olympics will be postponed for the first time since World War II seems real. Meanwhile, a more routine spectre hovers over the five-ringed circus  the notion that some of the greatest performances produced on the grand Olympic stage are not real. Even before the 1988 Seoul Games  where Ben Johnson was so juiced up his eyes leaked stanozolol when he watched a sad movie  we were accustomed to the possibility the highest-profile Olympic performances were a pharmaceutical hoax. From the bearded female shot putters of the Cold War era to the more recent disgrace of countries such as Russia, we have been conditioned to the notion of systematic cheating  especially when it came from the other side of the geopolitical fence. But now, more often, we see but do not quite believe even some of the most romantic tales from the Olympics. There was no more heart-warming moment at the 2012 London Olympics than when Mo Farah celebrated his victories in the 5,000 metres and 10,000 metres before a euphoric crowd with his endearing Mobot gesture. As Cathy Freeman celebrated her Indigenous Australian heritage in Sydney 12 years earlier and allowed us to share her pride, Farah symbolised the joys of Britain's multicultural society against the rising tide of the navel-gazing nationalism that would soon deliver Brexit. To be in London's Olympic stadium when Farah twice breasted the tape was to see Great Britain briefly united in purpose and celebration. Which is why the suspicion surrounding Farah since his long-time coach Alberto Salazar was suspended for four years for "orchestrating and facilitating prohibited doping", creates such trepidation. The BBC's investigative program Panorama aired an episode titled "Mo Farah and the Salazar Scandal" earlier this week, which included admissions that the four-time Olympic gold medallist Farah used a performance-enhancing substance, although not necessarily in banned quantities. The crux of the accusation against Farah is that he was injected with L-carnitine before the 2014 London Marathon on Salazar's instructions. L-carnitine is a naturally occurring amino acid that the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) has banned in dosages of more than 50ml in the space of six hours. There has been no accusation made or evidence produced that Farah used more L-carnitine than is allowed before the London Marathon or any other event. But Farah's initial denial he used the substance and the circumstances surrounding its administration arouse suspicion. Farah's case came to light during the United States Anti-Doping Agency's (USADA) investigation into Salazar, the head of the Nike Oregon Project where Farah trained throughout his two successful Olympic campaigns. Since Salazar's conviction the British champion has suffered guilt by association, unfairly so in some eyes given there has been no evidence his four Olympic gold medals are tainted. But it has now been revealed that during a five-hour interview with USADA in London, Farah repeatedly denied using L-Carnitine before the London Marathon, only to change his story after a conversation with UK Athletics head of endurance Barry Fudge minutes after leaving the interview room. Fudge, it transpired, had travelled to Switzerland on Salazar's instructions to collect L-carnitine from the coach's supplier, an extremely unusual task for a British coach that had not been disclosed in previous enquiries. Last year, Farah strongly criticised the media, who he claimed was unfairly destroying his reputation because of his association with Salazar. But while none of the dots assembled by Panorama condemned Farah, when they are put together they create  at best  some confusion around Farah's credibility. Farah's lawyers have issued a statement in which they claim he was "one of the most tested athletes in the UK, if not the world" and that "interviews are not memory tests". But the Lance Armstrong case has diminished the "I've been tested hundreds of times" defence, given that investigation  rather than the testing often successfully dodged by many drug cheats  is now the most common means of nailing high-profile dopers. To some in British track and field, Farah already stands accused of breaching the "spirit of the sport" by his use of L-carnitine. The distance star's defenders might quite understandably respond that athletes who are being asked to follow both the literal WADA guideline around the use of supplements and this more ethereal "spirit of sport" code, are intolerably burdened. But, sadly, we live in an age where the innocence of sport has been lost. A time symbolised by the millions of now long-discarded yellow Livestrong wristbands and the hatches constructed in the Russian laboratories from which tainted drug samples were smuggled. This does not justify a rush to judgement of those such as Farah, who is so far accused only of using an amino acid that is legal in small quantities. On the contrary, Farah's case should for now remind us to be careful that the natural scepticism created by so many fallen heroes is not overtaken by the wilful blindness of outright cynicism. We must also avoid blind parochialism. The cloud hovering over some of British sport's most meritorious and raucously celebrated sporting achievements, including those of its storied cyclists, might seem ironic to those Australians who heard the chants of the English crowds during the last Ashes series  "Same old Aussies, always cheating". But in modern sport, if you throw the doping stone, you can very quickly find yourself in a glasshouse. 
Sydney train network in chaos, major delays on several lines after derailment 
Sydney's train network was thrown into chaos this morning with major delays on several lines after a work car derailed near Circular Quay. Workers in a ute, which had been modified to drive on the rails, were inspecting the track early this morning when the vehicle derailed on the City Circle line between Circular Quay and Wynyard. "It slipped off the rail, it jammed itself and it took our emergency crews to jack it up," Sydney Trains boss Stewart Mills said. The maintenance vehicle was removed about 7:18am and services resumed on the City Circle shortly after. Mr Mills said about 130 services were impacted, but very few were cancelled. Since then, he said, it had been a "complicated recovery". The worst-affected services were for commuters travelling from Western Sydney, the north shore and the airport. Impacted lines included the T2 Inner West and Leppington, T3 Bankstown and T8 Airport and South Line. Even after the morning rush, delays were still being felt, with trains between Circular Quay and Parramatta arriving up to 75 minutes late. Sydney Trains expects trains to be running to timetable for the afternoon commute. Frustrated commuters took to social media to vent about the delays. "Left my house at 6am. Start work in 4 mins at 8 and I'm not even close to getting there any time soon. Just another day on Sydney Trains," one person tweeted. Sydney's train system relies significantly on the City Circle, and incidents there can have massive flow-on effects on lines elsewhere. Mr Mills apologised for the delays, describing a string of recent disruptions as "unprecedented". "We've had some really difficult, exceptional circumstances over the last month," he said. "Whether it's exceptional record heat, to the storms, that is just unprecedented over the network." The price of ride share apps surged amid the chaos, with one commuter travelling 9km from Petersham to Martin Place claiming they were quoted a fare of $85. In a tweet, Sydney Trains encouraged commuters to consider using the city's light rail lines, which run between Dulwich Hill in the inner west, Randwick in the eastern suburbs, and Central. One passenger replied: "Looking forward to that light rail service in Riverwood. How long is it going to take to get here?" Mr Mills said no-one was injured during the derailment incident. There were also delays on the North Shore's line after a trespasser disrupted services at Central earlier this morning. 
Healthcare costs in the United States can leave Americans in debt, in court and living on the brink
Zann Nelson was having lunch with a friend when she suddenly started bleeding. In the bathroom, it looked like a heavy period, which made no sense, given she had not menstruated in a decade. Panic began bubbling up inside her as she rushed to see a doctor. Not only was she suddenly grappling with her own mortality, Zann was also terrified about what it could cost. Like millions of other Americans, she had no health insurance and in the land of the free there is only a very limited safety net. Medical bills are a big contributor to personal bankruptcy cases. "Before I was diagnosed, they handed me a little piece of paper to sign," Zann said. "The surgeon told me, 'don't worry about the money, we need to focus on your health,' and I thought, OK great, they're going to help me."  The diagnosis was uterine cancer and the surgeon's solution was a radical hysterectomy to remove Zann's uterus before the growth spread. The operation was a success. But within weeks, a series of bills began appearing in the mail  some from imaging, some from doctors and some from the hospital itself. The total cost of $45,000 was far more than Zann could afford, even on a monthly payment plan. She was sued by the local health system and fought back in court, but ultimately lost the case. The hospital put a claim on her family farm where Zann had lived most of her life, and she had to sell land to pay back the debt. "My case all came down to that little piece of paper with tiny writing, which was a contract," she said. "They denied not telling me about the cost and saying the things they did. The judge actually stated that I could have chosen to refuse the surgery." Stories like Zann's are a big reason healthcare is the top issue for many voters in this US election year. In 2019, one study found about 137 million Americans had faced some sort of financial stress due to medical costs.  The price of insurance has dominated debates between the Democrats vying to become Donald Trump's opponent in November. Even those with coverage who work full time are not immune from crippling, surprise bills. Amanda Sturgill is still thousands of dollars in debt due to co-payments from her teenage daughter's back surgery four years ago. "My daughter Makayla was getting my youngest child out of the bath and suddenly she had the worst pain she'd ever felt in her life," Amanda said. After various tests, doctors finally diagnosed Makayla with degenerative disc disease and recommended an operation. Amanda earns about $18 an hour and because she was insured through her employer, assumed she would be OK. But she was not prepared for all the out-of-pocket costs, and after falling behind, a sheriff turned up at her house with a court summons.  She was being sued for about $3,800. Amanda is currently going through a divorce and raising four children. Due to her debt payment plan and her daughter's ongoing treatment costs, there are weeks when she struggles to make ends meet. "It's very stressful. I ration medication. I've sold every piece of jewellery that I have. I have nothing left," Amanda said. "A lot of times, I'll go all day long and I won't eat, I save food for the kids." In a last-ditch effort to turn their financial situation around, some Americans file for bankruptcy. The precise number of medical bankruptcies is hotly disputed because people usually have multiple financial issues when they file, but lawyers say healthcare costs are a common factor. "About half of my cases each month have medical bills as a large factor. Usually those clients don't have health insurance or they have bad health insurance," bankruptcy lawyer Marshall Slayton said.  Mr Slayton said more Americans appeared to be forgoing health insurance altogether. "What you see is people take a risk. They say it's more important for me to put food on the table and have a car  than have health insurance," he said. "For some people, the gamble works out and for some people, it doesn't."  Academics have long warned the high price of care can have social consequences too. Right now, as authorities work to prevent the spread of the deadly coronavirus around the United States, there are concerns some uninsured people with mild cases may not seek treatment, due to the potential cost. The Miami Herald reported that one man who developed symptoms after returning from China in January could now owe thousands, after getting tested for coronavirus in hospital and being diagnosed with just the flu. All the Democrats trying to win the party's presidential nomination have put forward plans to reduce the risk of surprise medical bills. Former vice-president Joe Biden wants to expand the existing Affordable Care Act  which is also known as Obamacare  to include more Americans, further subsidise insurance premiums and drive down the cost of medicine. But current frontrunner Bernie Sanders is promising a universal, publicly funded Medicare For All insurance program that would cover all US residents with virtually no out-of-pocket costs. It would be a more generous health system than Australia's, even including free dental coverage. It would also reduce the number of uninsured Americans from about 8.8 per cent to nearly zero. Although the total price and net impact on national health expenditure are currently being ferociously debated, many forecasters predict it would cost the US Government roughly $46 trillion over a decade. "That's a reasonable middle estimate in a big range," said Marc Goldwein from the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, a Washington DC-based thinktank. "To put that in context, you'd have to double all income taxes or essentially double the national debt to pay for that." Some Democrats fear campaigning on Medicare For All at a general election could be politically tricky and it seemingly has little chance of getting through Congress unchanged. The healthcare industry is incredibly influential and for Americans with good insurance, the quality of care they receive is world class. "America currently attracts the best and brightest doctors and specialists from around the world because they earn very good wages," said Ge Bai from Johns Hopkins Carey Business School. "Research and medical discoveries here save lives everywhere and some in the industry fear Medicare for All could slow that innovation." But both Zann Nelson and Amanda Sturgill say something has to change in the coming years to ensure fewer people end up in their situation. Zann is a lifelong Democrat and is hoping a moderate like Joe Biden will win the White House this year. "You just have to look around the world to know that our health system does not make sense," she said at her farm north of Charlottesville. "It's a human right to be healthy and I think we should work on improving Obamacare." Amanda is likely to back self-described Democratic socialist Bernie Sanders, largely because of his Medicare For All plan. She even recently decided to appear in advertisements promoting the policy. Her family lives in a former coal mining area, near the border of Virginia, Tennessee and Kentucky, a region that is pro-Donald Trump. "I voted for [Republican President] George W Bush. I change my vote," she said. "People here hate Democrats but I think they hate Bernie Sanders a bit less. He thinks about working Americans." 
Australian Van Kham Chau loses appeal in Vietnam against 'terrorism' charges
Sydney retiree Van Kham Chau has lost his final appeal against his 12-year jail sentence in Vietnam on terrorism charges. Chau, 70, has been in jail for more than a year, after being found guilty of terrorist activities in what human rights groups have described as a sham trial against a political prisoner. The retired baker is a member of the human rights organisation Viet Tan, which the Vietnamese Government says is a terrorist organisation. In his final remarks during the appeal, Chau said although he was an Australian citizen, he had never forgotten his Vietnamese roots, and he had no reason to join a reactionary terrorist group that would act against the Vietnamese people.  "I love my homeland Vietnam and my people  I want my country to grow, the people [to] live with freedom and democracy," he said.  "I have never [done] anything to harm my people, even my captors who detained me. "I admit that I have made [a] mistake and admit my fault in entering Vietnam's territory with [the] identity card of another person. But during my short stay in Vietnam, I only had normal activities, nothing was terrorist."  Van Kham Chau, who fled Vietnam after the war, was investigated for a crime that carries the death penalty. Here's how his case unfolded. The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) said it was disappointed in the outcome and would continue to provide consular assistance to Chau and his family, including monitoring his health and wellbeing. "We are disappointed that Mr Chau's appeal has been unsuccessful. This marks the conclusion of his legal process," DFAT said in a statement to the ABC. "Vietnamese authorities understand our strong interest in his health and welfare. Australian officials have raised Mr Chau's case and will continue to do so. "We are concerned about the length of Mr Chau's sentence, particularly given his health and welfare may be severely impacted by serving such a sentence at his age." Elaine Pearson from Human Rights Watch said Chau and his two co-defendants, Tran Van Quyen and Nguyen Van Vien were convicted due to their affiliation with Viet Tan, "which has explicitly rejected violence but supports democracy and political participation in Vietnam". "They are the latest victims in a spiralling crackdown on dissent and free speech within Vietnam  they are among hundreds of political prisoners who are currently detained." She called on Minister for Foreign Affairs Marise Payne to speak out about Chau's case, saying it raised many concerns about due process. "The Australian Government should redouble its efforts to press strongly for Chau's return to Australia. On some occasions, Vietnam has allowed political prisoners to be released into exile in Europe or the US but that will only happen if there is strong pressure from the Australian Government," she said. Chau was arrested in Ho Chi Minh City in January last year while meeting an activist from the Brotherhood for Democracy group and he was accused of entering the country through Cambodia on false documents. In November, he was sentenced to 12 years in prison after being convicted for holding a senior position in the New South Wales chapter of Viet Tan and for "financing terrorism". His wife, Trang Chau, told the ABC she was upset by the court's decision.  "I'm very sad," she said, adding her family and community deeply missed him after he had spent more than a year in prison. "I hope the Government can help us to get him back in Australia, because I am very scared." She stressed her husband "did not do something wrong, only [advocated for] human rights". "My husband is not a terrorist. He is a good man who wanted to do something for Vietnam," she said.  Chau's lawyer, Trinh Vinh Phuc, told the ABC he could still request a review of the judgement and a retrial, but said it was a long process for political cases like Chau's and the chances of success were close to zero. Chau's sister, who lives in Vietnam, was not permitted to observe the courtroom proceedings.  Cardiologist and fellow Viet Tan member Phong Nguyen said he hoped the rejection of Chau's appeal would open up a path for negotiation between the Australian and Vietnamese governments. "Mr Chau is of no use to them anymore  they sentenced him, [which] serves the purpose of basically instilling fear in anyone who speaks against the Government. That's a very harsh sentence," Dr Nguyen said.  "We detest the sentence, because there is no evidence of anything  that could be labelled as terrorism or financing terrorism. "We don't believe this is the end. This is a time when bilateral talks need to be increased, particularly on compassionate grounds  he is elderly and he has got illnesses." Australian consulate officials were unable to visit Chau in the past month due to COVID-19 but were able to observe his appeal proceedings on Monday. They were both arrested in the same week by communist regimes. But Australia's reaction to the cases of Yang Hengjun and Van Kham Chau couldn't be more different. The detention centre where Chau is being held in Ho Chi Minh City cancelled all consular visits for the month of February, and non-consular visits were being approved on a case-by-case basis.  Vietnam has recorded 16 cases of the novel coronavirus, but there have been no deaths and all patients have recovered, according to the Johns Hopkins University map tracking the spread of the outbreak.  Chau's lawyer Mr Phuc listed a number of health concerns Chau faced in prison, including prostate problems, recurring vertigo, severe back pain and high blood pressure.  Chau has also been hospitalised at least twice since his arrest. His son Daniel told the ABC his family were hoping to try and visit Chau in prison in the coming months. [It's taken a toll] on Mum especially," he said, adding that the emotional side of the case was on his mind daily.  "If I could speak to my dad, I'd wish him good luck, I hope he's OK. It's hard. I'm really concerned about his health. "I just want him home." After Chau's arrest and incarceration, Chau's youngest son, Dennis, became something of an accidental activist, highlighting his father's plight at the 12th Geneva Summit on Human Rights and Democracy last fortnight.  Dennis, who is based in the UK, said his father was held in a cell for 23 hours a day, with one hour of exercise permitted.  "His mental health is deteriorating," Dennis said. "We've made requests for family visitation, none of which have been granted." "My father turned 70 last year, and so with a 12-year sentence, he'll be 82 when he is released. It is effectively a death sentence." Dennis said his father went back to Vietnam out of a sense injustice and to advocate for the rights of people in his homeland, which he fled as a refugee in the early 1980s. "My father isn't a fool, he would've known of the dangers of returning to Vietnam, but he went anyway," he said.  "My father came to Australia with nothing but the clothes on his back as a refugee after the Vietnam War. He worked hard all his life to make something for him and his family in his new adopted home.  "He grew to be a proud Australian, proud of the freedoms we take for granted." Dennis went on to say that his father "felt for the people of Vietnam" who were deprived of the same freedoms.  "This is why he felt compelled to advocate and effect change," he said.  He called on Prime Minister Scott Morrison and the Australian Government to act.  "The Australian Government must be held to a higher standard, as a western democracy, to not put trade relations above basic human rights  the ones that we hold so dear," he said.  "As trading partners of Vietnam, you are also accountable for the treatment of its people  when you sign that trade agreement. "I'll be unwavering in my mission to keep my father's voice and story alive. "It is silence that breeds inaction. It is silence that lets these governments know that it is OK to continue with their ways." 
The human race is not special. So why do we think we're immune to mass extinction?
Could we face a mass extinction of human beings in our lifetime?    As global temperatures rise and this summer's bushfires devastate the Australian landscape, it's a worst-case scenario that is beginning to be seriously discussed. The rapid spread of the coronavirus in recent weeks has also escalated the anxiety that people feel about their mortality.   However, there seems to be a difference in the way the public has reacted to these two threats. Global warming and potential mass extinction are seen as a vague threat somewhere out there in the distant future, whereas coronavirus is viewed as a clear and imminent danger. The growing fear of a coronavirus pandemic appears to have quickly motivated Australian health authorities and governments into immediate and appropriate action. By comparison, the anxiety around global warming and potential mass extinction seems muted. Things came to a head at dinner one night earlier this year, when my girlfriend suggested the chat was too depressing. She believed in climate change, she just didn't see the point of being so negative. A report written by Paul Gilding, a fellow at the University of Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership, and commissioned by the Breakthrough National Centre for Climate Restoration, put forward the view that there is a "high likelihood of human civilisation coming to an end in 2050" if action is not taken to curb climate change. Climate change deniers will typically denounce any discussion of mass extinction as histrionic doomsday talk, while some climate change believers argue that discussing mass extinction now is precipitous and dampens the optimism that we can turn global warming around with a positive "can-do" spirit. Who would have thought that both camps have a psychological mindset in common?  A naive optimism that human beings are just so clever that it will all turn out OK.   Psychoanalysts use the term manic defence to describe how human beings can pathologically cling to optimism and hope as a way of denying their depression and anxiety.   To contemplate mass extinction is indeed a dark place to go to and a difficult conversation to have  even more difficult than global warming itself  because it is to think the unthinkable.  Scientists suspect we are on the cusp of a sixth mass extinction. So how much could human activities be driving the process this time? But spiritual traditions across the world believe it brings depth and richness to our lives to contemplate our own death. It does not necessarily have to be a morbid preoccupation. It is sobering to consider what scientists tell us of the paleo-ontological history of the Earth, which may throw some light on the fate of human beings when we look at the broad sweep of time.  "More than 99 per cent of all organisms that have ever lived on Earth are extinct. As new species evolve to fit ever-changing ecological niches, older species fade away," National Geographic science writer Michael Greshko wrote. "At least a handful of times in the last 500 million years, 75 to more than 90 per cent of all species on Earth have disappeared in a geological blink of an eye in catastrophes we call mass extinctions." As human beings, we need to remind ourselves that we are oxygen-breathing biped mammals. In other words, we are animals. Evolutionary science demonstrates that we are continuous, not discontinuous, with other animal species.  Fossils from around the world suggest the "terrible lizards" were in decline before the collision. If one's view of the world is based on science, we are not special, we were not placed here by a God to be the custodians of the Earth (and if we were, we have let the Almighty down big time!) and like all other species, we will have our place in the sun. We will die out, and other, more adaptable, life forms will take our place.   The myth that we are somehow special and will continue to live forever as a dominant species is based on a deluded human-centric form of existential narcissism.   We may wring our hands and our hearts may ache at the rapid destruction of wildlife that is happening right now before our eyes, but we never seem to seriously consider that we may go the same way.   But as the poet John Donne wrote: "Do not ask for whom the bell tolls, it tolls for thee". We may liken the state of the Earth to a man who has just been told by his doctors that he has lung cancer.  There is treatment available that might save him, but it cannot be guaranteed that it will work.  The human species may, metaphorically, keep puffing away on fossil fuels and an inevitable death may well be the outcome in a blip of geological time.   But even if we "undergo the treatment"  changing over to sustainable forms of renewable energy, for example  there is no guarantee of survival.   Friends of mine who work professionally in palliative care tell me that most people have peaceful deaths. Even better, it is well documented that some people have transformative spiritual experiences as they near the inevitability of death.   They atone for all of their past mistakes quite freely and without restraint, their hearts open to loved ones and enemies alike, and they experience a sense of oneness with the transience of life and the interconnectedness of all things.  We can only aspire to the same maturity of spirit.  As a psychologist, years of clinical experience tells me it is healthier to gently bring anxiety out into the open and discuss it empathically with others rather than taking refuge in angry denial or manic defence.   This includes how we talk to children about this distressing topic when they want to engage us with their questions and their fears. Climate change is scary, and it can be really distressing for children. This is how one mum found a way to talk to her kids honestly, without making them panic. The same guidelines for talking to children generally about death can be applied here.   When I have worked with children who have a parent with a life-threatening illness, I find it is much wiser for the adults to tell the truth calmly and kindly rather than give false hope.   There is a vast difference in saying to a child, "Daddy is very sick but the doctors are going to make him better and he will be home soon," compared to, "Daddy is very sick and everyone is doing everything they can to help him get better but we can't be sure he is going to live much longer. We all hope he pulls through." Children can sniff out the anxious emotion behind the sweet syrupy words of false optimism much more than we give them credit for.  They pick up an incongruence between the positive message and the exaggerated emotion with which it is expressed, and it confuses them.  Being straight with them will calm them far more than false optimism.   This means the adults learning to calm themselves in the face of their own inevitable mortality.   The practice of mindfulness and the contemplation of one's own death is one beneficial way to do this. While mass extinction from global warming, including mass extinction of human beings, is a new and concerning threat that we have not had to face before, death itself is not new. Our here-and-now lives are more vibrant and full of gratitude when we can embrace them fully. Geoff Dawson is a psychologist and Zen Buddhist teacher. 
Tasmania news: Bandidos member charged over theft, basketball announcement imminent
Here's what you need to know today: Two men allegedly involved with the Bandidos motorcycle gang have been charged in relation to the theft of $5,000 in building materials from a Devonport motel. Tasmania Police said they conducted a search at the Bandidos clubhouse on February 26, following the theft the previous day at the Argosy Motel. "A 32-year-old Bandidos outlaw motorcycle gang member and a 39-year-old Bandidos associate have been charged with stealing," police said, adding as a result of the search, "all of the stolen property has been recovered". Both men have been charged with stealing and have been bailed to appear in the Devonport Magistrates Court on April 20. Anyone with further information is urged to contact Tasmania Police on 131 444, or Crime Stoppers anonymously on 1800 333 000 or online at crimestopperstas.com.au. The Tasmanian Government has reminded the public there has been no positive local results from coronavirus testing and the state "remains well prepared", in the wake of the Federal Government's implementation of its emergency response plan. In a joint statement, Premier Peter Gutwein and Health Minister Sarah Courtney said they had received an "update" that the Government had "moved ahead of the World Health Organisation and is now effectively operating on the basis that a pandemic had been declared".  "The Prime Minister believes the risk of a global pandemic is very much upon us and as a result the Commonwealth Government has taken steps necessary to prepare for such a pandemic," the statement reads. "The plan includes preparations for extra controls at airports and ports, further quarantine measures and detailing how schools should react to any widespread outbreak." The Tasmanian Government said it "recognises travel restrictions may have an impact on some Tasmanian businesses", and encouraged anyone with any questions to call 1800 440 026 or visit the website. Tasmania's entry into the National Basketball League is expected to be made official today. It is understood league owner Larry Kestelman will hold a press conference this afternoon in Hobart to announce that Tasmania will enter the competition. It will come off the back of a Glenorchy City Council vote that will see the Derwent Entertainment Centre sold to the State Government. The Tasmanian team will play home games out of the revamped arena from next year. The state has not been represented in the national competition since 1996. The Tasmanian Greens have referred two ministers and a public servant to the Integrity Commissioner for alleged misconduct relating to a now-defunct forest protest ban, which threatened those staging demonstrations with fines of up to $500,000 before the ban was withdrawn on Tuesday. Greens leader Cassy O'Connor alleged Resources Minister Guy Barnett, Attorney-General Elise Archer and Mark Cocker from WorkSafe misused their positions, abused power and issued an unlawful prohibition against the Bob Brown Foundation seeking to peacefully protest. "We know this was an overtly political act designed to intimidate peaceful protesters who are standing up for our beautiful forests. We hope that the Integrity Commission recognises that this is an issue of ethics in government," she said. Ms Archer described the action taken by the Greens as disgraceful.  Tasmania's fifth wind farm has started power generation, nudging the state towards its target of using 100 per cent renewable energy by 2022. The $280 million Granville Harbour Wind Farm is expected to produce energy for 46,000 homes.  Resources Minister Guy Barnett said that production would help Tasmania become fully reliant on renewable energy in two years time. "We're on track to get to 100 per cent, fully self-sufficient in renewable energy by 2022 and that's very encouraging indeed" he said. But Goanna Energy's Marc White said the State Government still had to do more to meet the target. "The Granville Harbour wind farm will produce around two per cent of the state's consumption". "The Cattle Hill wind farm will produce about 3 to 4 per cent, so that'll still see us with a little bit of a deficit on the average inflow a year," he said. The state forecast for Friday is for showers and cool conditions in the south-west, clearing showers and cool in the south-east, and mostly cloudy and cool-to-mild in the north.  Saturday: Showers, mild in the south-west. Windy on the highlands. Mostly sunny, warm in the south-east. Mostly sunny, mild-to-warm in the north. Sunday: Showers, mild in the south-west. Mostly cloudy, mild in the south-east. Mostly cloudy, cool-to-mild in the north-west. Late shower, mild in the north-east. Monday: Showers, cool in the south-west. Mostly sunny, mild in the south-east. Mostly sunny, cool-to-mild in the north-west. Clearing shower, cool in the north-east.. A full and updated list of warnings can be found on the Bureau of Meteorology's Tasmanian Warnings summary webpage. Updated information about fires and permits can be found on the Tasmanian Fire Service website. Source: Bureau of Meteorology 
Vale the great Australian summer  devastated by bushfires, drought and flooding rain
"In January, days stretch out, with lots to do and find; we feel the sand, we tie the bait, we swim, we play, we stay up late." So mused acclaimed author Jane Godwin in her celebration of the great Australian summer  a narrative intrinsically linked to our national identity. From family camping trips along the coast, to bouts of backyard cricket, our love of summer cuts across all sects of the country, unifying even the most divided amongst us. But this year, for much of the eastern seaboard, languid days basking in the breeze were replaced by anxiety: for our homes and neighbours, for our families and friends, and for a future marred by climate change and the more extreme conditions it has started to bring. Images of sun-drenched families that would once symbolise the holidays were replaced by apocalyptic scenes of children in masks, enveloped by a red and orange hue. Thousands of homes that should have been adorned with Christmas decorations were instead reduced to rubble, and grieving families were left to grapple with the reality that their loved ones would not see the summer's end. As we mark the close of summer and the horror bushfire season  escalated by the outbreak of coronavirus and flooding along the east coast  any residual glow the festive season may have once had is nowhere to be seen. "So many people have come out of this summer probably in a worse sort of condition  because of the disruption and anxiety that came with the bushfires," says University of Tasmania fire ecologist David Bowman. "I think everyone in Australia probably knows someone who was affected. "It's a big event in your life, but now we're moving back to real life, the kids have to go back to school, people have to go back to jobs, and they're beginning to pause and go 'I never had a holiday'." So, is it time to say goodbye to the typical Australian summer for good? It is a question Professor Bowman has been pondering since the nation found itself in the crosshairs of unprecedented climatic conditions, now known as the "Black Summer". This bushfire season was always predicted to be ferocious, but with months of hot weather to go, it has already left a scar on the nation. As we contemplate a future where these kinds of catastrophes become increasingly frequent, he argued in an op-ed for The Conversation, perhaps it's time we rearranged the calendar and reschedule the peak holiday period to March or April. The proposal struck a chord with readers both at home and abroad, Professor Bowman says  something he puts down to its cross-cutting sentiment. "The Prime Minister got caught out on his holiday  [and then there was] the effect on the firefighters who missed out on their holiday and important family time," he says. "Something comparatively simple like rescheduling holidays, in my view, that's a trivial alteration in the adaptive program we're staring down the barrel at." While the economic impacts of the fires are predicted to run into the billions and the impact on tourism and trade has been highly publicised, there are lingering questions around the more intangible impact the lost summer has had on our national wellbeing. Ross Garnaut's climate change prediction is coming true and it's going to cost Australia billions, economists warn. Tony Veal, an adjunct professor at the University of Technology Sydney, likens it to the Cold War. "At one time, people were worried about whether we were going to be blown up by nuclear war, people can get very stressed about those things, as many people are by climate change," he says. "And if it's on your doorstep with fires and floods, it becomes even more stressful. Obviously, the people directly involved with it are stressed, but it can have an impact on the community at large." Professor Veal, who specialises in the role of leisure in work and planning policy, doesn't mince words: "In a very basic sense, if you don't have any time off, it'll kill you". But with nearly 80 per cent of Australians affected by the summer crisis in some way, the idea of a holiday might seem like a foreign concept for many  from those on the frontline working tirelessly trying to reckon with the ruins and communities living under the shadows of tragedy, to tourists who found themselves stranded in the fire zones and those forced to reschedule their summer break. "Now we have this coronavirus issue, so all those things contribute to stress," he says. "Whether you sit and chat with your friends or family, or play with your kids, or whether you go to the pub and have a drink, you need time to do it. "In times of stress, whatever the source of the stress, one needs that outlet. If you don't have those opportunities to take a break, there are consequences." The link between trauma born out of natural disasters and its impact on productivity and wellbeing has been well documented, both anecdotally and in scientific literature. But with millions of hectares burnt, wildlife decimated and the devastation firmly etched into the national consciousness, psychiatrists fear the secondary effects could be more widespread than many first thought. They are the heart-stopping videos that stopped the nation and stunned the world. But who filmed them and how did their stories end? "You might find that a person will be safe in their house, but they're worried about their friends out in the fire truck," says associate professor John Allan, president of the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists. "The blanket coverage we've had on television  I think people really saw this as a watershed moment for the country. "There's a secondary effect on many, many people through relationships and love  love for their country and love for their community  [and so] a very broad range of people are affected." As the weeks and months pass, and the nation irrevocably turns its attention elsewhere, the residual impact will continue to be felt by those communities on the frontline of the disaster. But while many will recover, for others, the trauma of our lost summer will remain for years to come. "You have the event, and all the support rushes in, there's all this wonderful stuff, and then the support is withdrawn," Professor Allan says. "There are people where that trauma lingers, and that becomes manifest over the next year or two, so starting about now. "This is the time we really need to make sure everyone has recovered, and those that haven't, really need that support." 
Turkey says it will let refugees into Europe after troops killed in Syria
Refugees in Turkey have headed towards Europe after an official declared that borders had been thrown open in response to the escalating war in Syria, where 33 Turkish soldiers were killed by Russian-backed Syrian government troops. European officials rushed to respond to Turkey's direct threat to reverse an agreement that halted the migration crisis of 2015-2016, when more than a million people arrived by sea in Greece and crossed the Balkans on foot. Moscow and Ankara traded blame over the strike in northwest Syria, the deadliest attack suffered by the Turkish army in nearly 30 years. Turkish financial markets plunged over the prospect of the country being pulled far more deeply into a new escalation of the nine-year-old war across the border in Syria. "We have decided, effectively immediately, not to stop Syrian refugees from reaching Europe by land or sea," a senior Turkish official said on condition of anonymity. "All refugees, including Syrians, are now welcome to cross into the European Union," the official said, adding that police and border guards had been stood down. Within hours, a column of dozens of migrants was heading on foot towards the European frontier in the early morning light. A man carried a small child in his arms. Others rode in taxis. The Syrian conflict has spawned a whole generation of children impacted by bombing and conflict. "We heard about it on the television," said Afghan migrant Sahin Nebizade, 16, in a group packed into one of three taxis parked on a highway. They had been living in Istanbul and were heading for a border crossing to Greece. At the Greek border, Hamid Muhammed, carrying a young girl, said he had been turned back by Greek police. "We want the Turkish and European governments to open this gate," he said. Greece and Bulgaria said they were immediately reinforcing their frontiers. Bulgaria's Prime Minister said the prospect of a new migration crisis was even more of a threat when European countries were struggling to respond to the coronavirus. However, both the EU and the United Nations refugee agency noted reports of any change at the border were still unofficial and Ankara had not made any formal announcement. Inside Syria itself, the escalated fighting has brought on perhaps the worst humanitarian crisis of the entire nine-year-old war. A million civilians have been displaced since December inside Syria near the Turkish border, in desperate winter conditions. Turkey, already home to 3.7 million Syrian refugees, said it could not take more. The Syrian civil war has worsened dramatically in recent months despite largely vanishing from the agenda of Western countries. Seven years of bloody conflict have backed hundreds of thousands of civilians into this deadly corner of the country with nowhere to run. What happens in Idlib is in the hands of leaders from Russia, Iran, Syria and Turkey. Government forces, backed by Russian air power, have launched an assault to capture the northwest, the last remaining territory held by rebels backed by Turkey. With diplomacy sponsored by Ankara and Moscow in tatters, NATO-member Turkey has come closer than ever in the conflict to direct confrontation with Russia on the battlefield. Presidents Tayyip Erdogan and Vladimir Putin spoke by telephone on Friday morning to head off further confrontation. The Kremlin said they agreed on the need for a new arrangement to avert clashes in Syria's Idlib province. Turkey said the leaders agreed to meet as soon as possible. "There is a risk of sliding into a major open international military confrontation," EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell said on Twitter. "It is also causing unbearable humanitarian suffering and putting civilians in danger." The return of refugees to the frontier was an immediate reminder of the 2015-2016 crisis  Western Europe's biggest migration since World War II  when 4,000 people drowned trying to reach Greece. Since then, Mr Erdogan has repeatedly threatened to "open the gates" in several disputes with European states. "At a time when we are imposing stricter border monitoring over the coronavirus, imagine if we have an inflow of hundreds of thousands of migrants," Bulgaria's Prime Minister Boyko Borissov said, announcing the mobilisation of extra police on the border with Turkey. "We cannot afford that." Turkey, for years the principal ally of rebels fighting against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, has sent thousands of troops and heavy military hardware in recent weeks into Idlib. Mr Erdogan has warned that Turkey would repel Mr Assad's forces unless they pulled back from Turkish posts. The United Nations and others have called for a ceasefire. The air strike on Thursday raised Turkey's military death toll to 54 in February in Idlib. It was the worst losses suffered by the Turkish military since a 1993 attack by Kurdish separatist guerrillas. Turkey's lira slid to a 17-month low and its main stock index plunged 10 per cent early on Friday even though authorities banned short selling across all Turkish shares. The United States, which has troops in another part of Syria, said it was very concerned about the reported attack on Turkish soldiers and stood by "our NATO ally Turkey". ABC/wires 
North Korea fires projectiles after threatening 'momentous' action
North Korea fired three short-range projectiles off its east coast on Monday, South Korea's military said, two days after the North threatened to take "momentous" action to protest outside condemnation over its earlier live-fire exercises. Seoul's Joint Chiefs of Staff said the multiple kinds of projectiles fired from the eastern coastal town of Sondok flew as far as 200 kilometres at a maximum altitude of 50 kilometres before landing in the waters between the Korean Peninsula and Japan. A JCS statement said South Korea expressed "strong regret" over the launches that, it said, violate a past inter-Korean agreement aimed at lowering military animosities. South Korea's national security director, Defence Minister and spy chief held an emergency video conference and agreed the North Korean action was not helpful to efforts to establish peace on the Korean Peninsula, according to South Korea's presidential Blue House. Japan's Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga said North Korea fired suspected ballistic missiles. North Korea is testing ballistic missiles again  but where's Donald Trump's "fire and fury"? He said the multiple North Korean projectiles travelled 100 to 200 kilometres but none landed inside Japan's exclusive economic zone. "North Korea's latest action, on top of its repeated firings of ballistic missiles, is a serious threat to the peace and safety of Japan and  a grave problem for the entire international society," Mr Suga said. In the past 10 days, North Korea has said leader Kim Jong-un supervised two rounds of live-fire artillery exercises in its first weapons tests since late November. Mr Kim had entered the new year with a vow to bolster his nuclear deterrent and not to be bound by a major weapons test moratorium amid a deadlock in US-led diplomacy aimed at convincing Mr Kim to abandon his nuclear program in return for economic and political benefits. South Korea and some European countries protested against the second North Korea drills on March 2, which they believe involved ballistic missile launches in a violation of UN Security Council resolutions. North Korea insists it has the right to conduct military drills in the face of US and South Korean forces on its doorstep. The UN Security Council did not issue any statement after discussing North Korea's March 2 drills, but five European members condemned what they called "provocative actions". Belgium, Estonia, France, Germany and the United Kingdom said afterwards that the tests undermine regional and international peace, security and stability. The North's Foreign Ministry on Saturday accused the five European countries of "repeating an absurd argument of condemnation and violation resolutions of the UN whenever we conducted military drills." "The reckless behaviour of these countries, instigated by the US, will become a fuse that will trigger our yet another momentous reaction," a ministry statement said. North Korea has threatened Australia with "disaster"  but could its missiles reach our shores? Last week, Kim Jong-un's younger sister levelled diatribes and crude insults against South Korea for criticising its earlier live-fire exercises, but her statement was followed by Mr Kim sending a letter to South Korean President Moon Jae-in expressing condolences over its coronavirus outbreak. Some experts say North Korea may intend to catch South Korea off-balance before seeking help in reviving its dilapidated economy, since the US has said sanctions on North Korea will stay in place unless it takes significant steps toward denuclearisation. "The coronavirus is likely exceeding North Korea's public health capacity, so Kim Jong-un is playing a two-level game," said Leif-Eric Easley, associate professor at Seoul's Ewha Womans University  "At the domestic level, his regime claims to protect the people with drastic quarantine measures and military exercises against external threats. "Pyongyang may be seeking international assistance, but remains obsessed with not appearing in an inferior position to Seoul." Nuclear talks between Pyongyang and Washington remain stalled since the breakdown of a second summit between Mr Kim and President Donald Trump in Vietnam in early 2019. Subsequent talks between the two countries failed to produce much progress amid disputes over how much sanctions relief should be given in return for a limited step to move away from nuclear weapons by North Korea. AP 
International Women's Day marches around the world call for end to violence against women
Thousands of people around the world have defied government restrictions and fears of the coronavirus to take to the streets to mark International Women's Day. Large demonstrations demanding increased gender equality and an end to female exploitation took place in cities including Madrid, Buenos Aries, Kiev and Manila. Demonstrations in Paris and Bishkek, the capital of Kyrgyzstan, were marred by clashes between police and demonstrators. In Pakistan, thousands of women held rallies across the country despite the threat of violence from fundamentalist groups. Demonstrators clashed with police in Chile and Turkey, as well as Mexico where thousands gathered to protest the number of women being killed in the country every day. Dozens of women covered Mexico City's central Zocalo square with names of victims like Adriana, Dulce, Paola, Nayeli, Ingrid, Maria and many others as part of protests against gender violence. The march was then led by the mothers of murdered girls. "I don't want to be the next one, and I don't want my mother to be the next one," Ana Paula Santos, a 21-year-old university student, said. Government data shows 3,825 women suffered violent deaths in Mexico last year, 7 per cent more than in 2018. Thousands more have gone missing without a trace in recent years. That works out to an average of more than 10 women killed each day, many of those at the hands of their partners, making it one of the most dangerous countries in the world for females. Murders of women in Mexico are often accompanied by sexual violence and brutality, and authorities seem incapable of preventing or properly investigating the crimes, very few of which result in convictions. Marchers carried signs saying, "we are the heart of those that no longer beat", and, "I'm marching today so that I don't die tomorrow". Bands of masked women smashed windows, lit fires and spray-painted messages on buildings. Many in the crowd cheered at the sight of vandals spraying messages like, "we're fed up". One of the biggest demonstrations was in Chile, where thousands flooded the streets of the capital, Santiago. There was dancing and music as well as angry demands for gender equality and an end to violence against women. "They kill us, they rape us, and nobody does anything," some chanted. National police estimated 125,000 people took part in the capital and nearly 35,000 in other cities, but organisers said the crowds were far larger. Many protesters demanded that a proposed new constitution strengthen rights for women and thousands wore green scarves in a show of support for activists in neighbouring Argentina, which is considering a proposal to legalise elective abortion. In the Philippines, where abortions are punishable by up to six years in prison, President Rodrigo Duterte's record on women's rights became one of the targets of the protests in Manila. "In many different ways or forms, women are being exploited and taken advantage of," Arlene Brosas, the representative of a Filipino advocacy group, said during a rally that drew hundreds to the area near the presidential palace. Tens of thousands of women took to the streets in Madrid and other Spanish cities, with a massive banner reading, "with rights, without barriers. Feminists without frontiers", carried at the front of the march in the capital. Spanish health authorities did not put any restrictions on the march but recommended that anyone with symptoms like those of coronavirus stay home. Authorities said 120,000 people participated in Madrid's march, down from 350,000 last year. In Pakistan, women managed to rally in cities across the country, despite petitions filed in court seeking to stop them. The opposition was stirred in part by controversy over a slogan used in last year's march: "My Body, My Choice." Some conservative groups had threatened to stop this year's marches by force. But Pakistani officials pledged to protect the marchers. The rallies are notable in a conservative country where women often do not feel safe in public places because of open harassment. In Istanbul, Turkey, riot police fired tear gas to try to disperse thousands of demonstrators, while security forces in Kyrgyzstan arrested about 60 people  reported to be mostly women  after a group of men tried to break up what authorities called an unauthorised rally in the capital, Bishkek. Tens of thousands of women also marched through Paris, bemoaning the "virus of the patriarchy". "Enough impunity!" chanted some activists, who focused on the high rate of women killed by their husbands in France, where one woman was killed every two or three days by a current or former partner in 2019. The French Government has increased efforts to crack down on domestic violence. "They should provide resources for shelters for women, victims of violence, real resources, human resources, also prevention programs for violent men," union activist Julia Parbotin said. ABC/wires 
