Coronavirus Care Army raises alarm after 80yo woman falls and breaks hip, trapped in house for days
An 80-year-old woman who fell and broke her hip — stuck alone on the floor of her home for days — has been rescued by police after a member of Queensland's newly-formed coronavirus Care Army raised the alarm. Erika Freingruber feared she was going to die alone in her Beaudesert house, south of Brisbane, and believes she blacked out during parts of the ordeal. Police bodycam footage captured the moment officers kicked down her door after hearing Ms Freingruber calling for help. "I fell down," she told police officers once they were inside. Constable Max Gillet and Constable Glenn Engels offered Ms Freingruber apple juice as she was lying on the floor with a pillow under her head. Ms Freingruber is recovering in hospital after the fall late last month and was visited by her rescuers, who came with flowers in hand. "You're my lifesavers, my angels, not policemen, my angels," she told them.  "Can you imagine a week, nearly a week lying there, without help day and night? "Every doctor who came here said, 'You don't know how lucky you are that you are alive'. "If you wouldn't have come, I don't think I'd be sitting here." Ms Freingruber believes she broke her hip when she stepped out of bed in the morning. She cannot remember exactly how long she was there but it was up to five days. "I don't know what happened, I must have fallen unconscious because there's some time I cannot account for." Constable Engels said welfare checks quite often don't end well and he was relieved to hear Ms Freingruber yell out for help. "To hear her call out was gold for us, we knew we were in a good position," he said. He hoped the story of her rescue inspires more people to sign up to be part of the Care Army. "And hopefully save more lives," he said. Concerns about Ms Freingruber were first raised by Care Army worker Paul Mahoney. The new organisation was set up by the State Government to help monitor the elderly and vulnerable during the pandemic. Mr Mahoney said he was worried after not hearing back from her in several days. "I had some concerns because when I spoke to Erika a few days before hand she had really been on the ball," he said. "We'd also had people talk to her … about fall alarms and possibly about her getting one. "She wanted a few days to think over it and when I [returned to work after two days off], I didn't find any notes that had been made about it, so I really was worried," he said. "It rang alarm bells because she'd been so mentally alert that I was worried this was out of the ordinary for her. "I rang her and couldn't contact her and then I also contacted her friend who had not been able to contact her either, so that's when I rang the police." Kate Jones, Minister in charge of the Care Army, thanked volunteers for helping. More than 28,000 volunteers have registered, receiving more than 13,000 calls for help. "When you contrast those images with the images that we've seen of the elderly in places like Italy, Spain and America, it just shows you this is Queensland's story and that Queensland cares," she said. "There would be people in our community that don't have that support and that is what the Care Army is all about." 
