Mount Isa doctor says regional north-west Queensland is waiting for private flu vaccines to arrive
A Mount Isa doctor is reporting supply issues obtaining influenza vaccines this year amidst a rise in demand due to COVID-19, but health authorities are denying a problem. Dr Michael Mbaogu from the Mount Isa Medical Centre said he has seen a "huge increase" in patients presenting for the flu vaccine.  The funded vaccine is available for anyone aged six months to five years, anyone over 65, pregnant women, Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander patients, and people with chronic medical conditions.  "The trouble is that the non-government funding flu vaccines for people nt in the above categories are scarce," Dr Mbaogu said.  Health Minister Steven Miles said this morning that he was aware of "sporadic" shortages in some regional areas.  He said anyone concerned should contact their pharmacist or doctor and ask to be informed when supplies arrive. Mount Isa pharmacist, Vashti Dobson, said she had been told not to expect vaccinations to be delivered before the end of June. "We have tried to order extra vaccines from our supplier, and basically there is a significant delay in receiving those," she said.  "Pre-orders were placed in November and we ordered based on how many people we vaccinated last year, then once there was an increased demand we tried to order additional vaccines in March. "At this stage we're still waiting on 160 vaccines." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Ms Dobson, who is the pharmacist in charge for two local pharmacies, said she does not think the 160 vaccines will fill the demand. "I would say that with the number of calls we're getting, not it won't be enough," she said.  "I think that because of the big media attention around getting a flu shot and the coronavirus situation, that people are concerned that they won't get their vaccination." Australian Medical Association (AMA) North Queensland Representative, Michael Clements, said Queensland Health was doing its best.  "I really can't fault Queensland Health to be honest, remembering that we place our orders for these flu vaccines," Dr Clements said.  "These orders were placed last year, there's only so much that we can do — we could have tempered the health message a little bit, saying 'get your flu vaccine as soon as you can' as opposed to saying 'you need to get it — get it now'." Dr Clements, who works in Karumba every month, said the private flu vaccines were a supply issue not a national shortage. "One of the other things that is effecting demand at the moment is we've seen a lot of companies … making the flu vaccine compulsory," he said. "That's actually adding to the demand for the private flu vaccine stock."  A Queensland Health spokesperson said there had been no issue delivering the government-funded vaccine under the National Immunisation Program to Mount Isa. As of May 6, more than 1.3 million doses of the NIP vaccine have been distributed across Queensland. The spokesperson said all other flu vaccines other than that government-funded program were supplies by private market, not Queensland Health.  "Queensland Health does not have oversight of the supply or availability of influenza vaccine in the private market," the spokesperson said. "However, we are aware that the Australian Government has sourced additional supplies of influenza vaccine, which is anticipated to be available in the private market from June 2020. "There have been no issues with delivering government funded National Immunisation Program influenza vaccine to Mt Isa.  "However, due to limited commercial transportation options, Queensland Health has experienced some difficulty in delivering government funded vaccines to the communities of Burketown and Karumba." 
