Eight big issues for vulnerable students highlighted by coronavirus crisis, charity says
She's only six years old, but Sylvana's education has already served up challenges most kids won't even need to think about during their entire school life. When the COVID-19 crisis closed her school, Sylvana was forced to switch to online learning in a home that didn't even have a computer. "We just had Nanny's mobile phone," Sylvana said. For the first three weeks, Sylvana and her grandmother Sylvia — her primary carer — both struggled. "We [were] learning through the mobile phone, which was very difficult at times because you couldn't even read it," Sylvia said. "I'm 63, Sylvana's nearly seven. And I'm thinking, it's been that many years since I've been to school, how am I going to help her?" Sylvia had never asked for help before, but she steeled herself and approached the Smith Family. The charity supplied a laptop and internet connection. "I felt so happy," Sylvana said, before adding with a laugh: "But Nanny opened the box so I was a little bit angry." Even with the laptop it's been a struggle, and Sylvia knows Sylvana has fallen behind. "I think there's going to be a lot of work catching up, because I can only do so much," Sylvia said. The Smith Family, Australia's leading educational charity, has produced a report based on its work helping 700 schools and 50,000 disadvantaged students during the COVID-19 crisis. It's the broadest look yet at the impact of Australia's biggest education experiment in decades — remote learning — and the implications for the futures of many young people. The report identifies eight key areas of concern: • The "digital divide" faced by families without computers or internet, or multiple children sharing one device • Challenges with homeschooling such as the stress of establishing new routines and financial pressures from the cost of stationery, printing, etc • Increased risk of students disengaging altogether — particularly those starting high school this year, or in year 10 • Unemployment as many tertiary students lose their jobs • Mental health concerns • Limitations on family life and loss of family supports creating issues with interactions with extended family • Food insecurity and the closure of school breakfast clubs, with one family's weekly food budget increasing from $200 to $350 • Delays and difficulty accessing support services A separate report released today by the Centre for Independent Studies (CIS) warns disadvantaged students in NSW, Queensland, Victoria, Tasmania and the ACT will have fallen several weeks behind. Using US data on normal schools compared to online schools, and applying the findings to NAPLAN results in Australia, the think tank estimates those students will have to catch up one to two weeks' lost learning in reading and two to three weeks' in numeracy. "The learning lost due to Australian school closures is not irretrievable, but it does require state and territory governments to assess students on return to school, identify those who have fallen behind, and provide intensive intervention to ensure they catch up with their peers," the CIS report says. Source: Pain without gain: Why school closures are bad policy, Centre for Independent Studies Jasmyn Lloyd is seen as a future Indigenous leader, but the 20-year-old medical student from rural SA is finding it tough just getting by at the moment. She too was supported by the charity in school, and surprised herself by getting the marks she needed to study medicine. She dreams of returning to a small community as a rural GP after she finishes university, but COVID-19 has threatened her hard work. A Smith Family scholarship meant she could buy a laptop to keep up with remote learning, but the pandemic led to the loss of her part-time job and her parents can't assist her financially. "It was a lot of shock horror," she said. "There was a lot of times where I'm like, 'I'm going to have to move back home, I'm going to have to quit uni, I can't afford to stay in the city anymore', and it was getting to the stage where I was almost having to pack my bags." Again, the Smith Family's insights suggest Ms Lloyd's experience is all too common, with tertiary students from disadvantaged backgrounds facing similar challenges to schoolkids. Many have had to deal with changed living arrangements, especially those who had been staying on campus or in student accommodation. Some also did not have access to internet, computers or affordable data, and were reliant on financial help. In addition to appealing for donations to its winter relief program the charity is calling on governments, corporations and the community to help these students. The report says "tackling digital disadvantage" should be a top priority in the pandemic recovery. When coronavirus suddenly tilted the educational playing field, Ryan Hicklin — stuck with just a pre-paid mobile phone — did not have the tools he needed to learn. Then a charity stepped in to help. It calls on telecommunications companies to find ways to offer further help to low-income families, following NBN Co's $150 million COVID-19 relief package. "This could involve discounting retail prices, or the direct provision of data and home internet packages to target groups," the report says. It also calls for technical support helplines for parents and carers who need help with digital proficiency and students' online learning platforms. Smith Family CEO Lisa O'Brien said vulnerable students returning to school might need additional learning support to make up for lost time. "It's important we act now so these students don't fall even further behind," she said. The ABC understands states are working on testing programs to identify students who have fallen behind. 
