When coronavirus arrived these students' worlds turned upside down
The themes of safety and isolation feature in the artwork of two Queensland students who have documented their drastically changed world during COVID-19.  Year 12 student Lateisha Hurst, 17, created illustrations for her school yearbook combining native birds and symbols of the pandemic such as masks and hand sanitiser. Meanwhile, art student Ben Watson, 19, photographed both himself and his grandparents wearing personal protective equipment for his university assignment.  Lateisha, a vice captain at Noosa District State High School, remembers clearly the moment COVID-19 turned her world upside down. "It was on the news, and then the next day I went to work [at a local supermarket] and I had to change everything I was doing," she said. "We had to wipe down the benches after every customer and make sure we were all sanitised so we didn't pass [the virus] on to anyone."  Then school closed and Lateisha was navigating online learning and separated from her friends. "It was really hard … it was all online and we had to relearn everything — it was a big change," she said. "And I really liked hanging out with my friends. "It's a big part of who I am, so that was hard." Lateisha said returning to school was "one of the best feelings". "Just getting back to all my friends was a big part of that, and probably because everyone was in it together," she said. When she drew illustrations for the school's 2020 yearbook, titled Yali, which means "to call" in the local Gubbi Gubbi dialect, she captured the memories of COVID-19. "When we look back on our yearbook, we can think, 'Wow, all this actually happened'," Lateisha said. "I thought it was important to have a statement on the impact of COVID on our community, and how it's also affecting the environment. "We've seen so many animals that have come out into new places where they haven't before because of how populated those areas are. "So it's been a big change not for just the community but also for our wildlife." Lateisha said her main "takeaway" from living through the global pandemic was to see people could be more considerate of each other. "We have seen people working together and actually thinking about other people, where before COVID it wasn't as much," she said. Lateisha said the pandemic experience has made her determined to achieve her dreams of becoming a primary school teacher when high school ends. "I want to help people," she said. Creating a lasting visual record of the pandemic also became the focus for University of the Sunshine Coast (USC) photography students. Lecturer in photography, Tricia King, said her students had to quickly adapt a photo documentary project that was meant to be a narrative shadowing someone as the weeks went on. "At the start of the year, they could have photographed anything in the world but [as COVID struck] they have a very restricted pool of subjects," she said.  "So, we have actually documented the change in just a few weeks from going outside, to taking photos from the car only, to not going outside at all." Capturing history as it happened was a deeply personal project for 19-year-old USC student, Ben Watson. Over a period of three weeks he documented the change in his grandparents' daily lives during isolation, photographing them safely through windows, or wearing personal protection equipment and using a zoom lens to maintain a safe social distance inside the home. His images captured the additional care his grandmother has been giving his grandfather with dementia. "My grandma could no longer go out and do leisure activities or invite visitors home," Mr Waton said. "She had to stop carers coming to the house … she didn't want herself or my grandpa in contact from the coronavirus. "It's a very different world." Mr Watson said as a result of the social restrictions his grandfather's behaviours had altered a lot. "This was a very big change in my grandpa's routine," he said. "Now he spends a lot more time in his room alone." With restrictions easing, Mr Watson can now visit his grandparents without a mask but his images of their time in isolation have become a powerful and personal record of a historic time. The project has also fuelled his creative ambitions. "I put my heart and soul into this project," he said.  "My plan is to do something with photography when I graduate, like more photojournalism work." 
