Coronavirus leaves Sydney man still struggling for breath two months after being discharged
David Allen has been in choirs since he was three years old. Now, the coronavirus survivor struggles to sing at all and runs out of air mid-line. The 32-year-old audiologist from Epping, in Sydney's north-west, was infected with COVID-19 while travelling in Belgium in early March. Doctors say his voice will return but two months after being cleared of the virus, David says he still struggles daily with fatigue and shortness of breath. "There is this moment where every time I push myself beyond what I can to that slightly breathless point, there is this just grinding fear that maybe the next breath won't actually come," he says. Doctors have told him it is normal for a recovery from pneumonia to be about four to six months as the damaged lung linings fix themselves, and encouraged him to keep up singing and walking to build strength. Earlier this month, he wrote about his recovery on social media and says he was inundated with people sharing similar stories of struggling and feeling like they had no-one to talk to.  "It really connected with a lot of people," he says. "The most heartbreaking part of it was the number of people who said 'I know, this is me, this is my experience'. "The discourse is very much about once you are — quote-unquote — 'recovered', that somehow your life goes back to normal, and it really doesn't," David says. "We haven't spoken about that story because it's scary, you know? It's really, really scary being a 32-year-old who is unable to walk around the park." David contracted coronavirus at a dance party and admits he was "quite naive" at the time about the risk of infection.  When he got back to Sydney, he had a few days off for jet lag when news emerged of infections from the party and he tested positive on March 16 despite not having any symptoms at that stage.  Two days later, he started having trouble breathing, severe headaches, chills and fatigue. It was like, he says, having flu multiple times over. NSW went into lockdown two days before David was cleared by NSW Health on March 25. By March 27, NSW saw its largest daily case spike to date with 212 confirmed COVID-19 infections. While David was never admitted to hospital for COVID-19, one day, feeling overwhelmed by the isolation and a shortness of breath, he had an anxiety attack, was briefly hospitalised for monitoring and is now on a mental-health plan.  David knows he is fortunate to have emerged at all from the suffocating fog of COVID-19 but says it is not really cause for celebration.  "It's hard to feel lucky when we're talking about the statistics," he says. "I don't feel particularly lucky. I feel grief for so many people who have become sick and those who have died or have ongoing disability." He says what is important to think about is that this is a collective story of trauma and grief for the loss of normal life. "Everybody is traumatised, everybody is hurting," he says. "The big thing that really stands out to me is there's a lot of discussion about getting back to normal. "We need an acknowledgement, a change in our language that it's not about going back to what it was before. It's not about reopening the country, it's about opening it in a new way.  "We are never going back to normal." Professor Tania Sorrell is director of the Marie Bashir Institute for Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity at the University of Sydney and says patients will need to be followed for a long time to fully understand COVID-19 recovery.  "We are really trying very hard to determine exactly when the long-term consequences are and we will need to follow patients for up to two years to be confident that we can be really clear about it," she says.  "I'm certainly aware of individual patients who seem to feel well one day and feel terrible the next, or they look as though they're improving and suddenly there seems to be a relapse," she says. In addition to impacts on the body, it's important to bear in mind mental health, too, she says.  "It's a little bit like post-traumatic stress disorder that patients or individuals can suffer if they've been to war or in any other really stressful condition.  "Under those circumstances, hospitals typically do have support processes for their patients after discharge, which include psychological assessment, social worker assessment as well as follow-up by various clinicians." She said long-term follow-up clinics are being set up and GPs are also undertaking follow-ups. There's also access to support processes such as psychological or social-worker assessment. She says, in general, rest is the best therapy and people like David Allen are doing the right thing by exercising without overdoing it. She says while some analogies can be drawn with other diseases, COVID-19 remains uncharted territory. "We are learning about this — it's a new disease, and that's why as a health care profession we want to keep a very close eye on our patients to make sure that we're not missing something and that we can offer the best support and care that we can." 
