Dominic Cummings, Boris Johnson adviser and Brexit architect, refuses to resign over lockdown travel during coronavirus
UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson's senior adviser Dominic Cummings is fighting for his job after flouting the Government's coronavirus lockdown rules. Mr Johnson is standing by Mr Cummings despite calls from within his own Conservative Party for the aide to be dismissed for driving 250 miles (400 kilometres) during the coronavirus lockdown. Mr Cummings, one of the key figures in the 2016 Brexit campaign, came under pressure when newspapers reported he had travelled from London to northern England at the end of March, when his wife was ill with COVID-19 symptoms during a nationwide lockdown. Mr Johnson's office said in a statement that Mr Cummings made the trip because his wife was showing coronavirus symptoms, he thought he was likely to also get sick, and his parents had offered to help look after the couple's young son. The statement said Mr Cummings stayed in a house "near to but separate from" his extended family in Durham. The UK's lockdown stipulated that people should remain at home, leaving only for essential local errands and exercise. In a message to the nation on March 23, Mr Johnson said: "From this evening I must give the British people a very simple instruction — you must stay at home". Mr Cummings was seen in London on March 27 but travelled to Durham at some time between then and March 31, according to the BBC. Mr Cummings, who has repeatedly refused to resign, entered 10 Downing Street on Sunday (local time) after some Tory MPs demanded he quit. "It is intolerable that Boris's Government is losing so much political capital," MP Steve Baker wrote on Twitter. "Dominic Cummings must go." Fellow Conservative MP Damian Collins said Mr Cummings "has a track record of believing that the rules don't apply to him and treating the scrutiny that should come to anyone in a position of authority with contempt". "The Government would be better without him," he said. Mr Johnson, however, was steadfast in his support of Mr Cummings. "I conclude that in travelling to find the right kind of childcare, at the moment when both he and his wife were about to be incapacitated by coronavirus, and when he had no alternative — I think he followed the instincts of every father, and every parent. And I do not mark him down for that.," Mr Johnson said. "I believe that in every respect he has acted responsibly and legally." Keir Starmer, leader of the Opposition Labour Party, described Mr Johnson's decision to take no action against Mr Cummings as "an insult to the sacrifices made by the British people". "This was a test of the Prime Minister and he has failed it," Mr Starmer said in a statement. The UK Civil Service official Twitter feed posted and then deleted a message which appeared to be a criticism of Mr Johnson's stance. "Arrogant and offensive. Can you imagine working with these truth twisters?" Other prominent British figures have resigned after breaking lockdown rules. Epidemiologist Neil Ferguson quit as a member of the Government's scientific advisory group after he was visited at home by his girlfriend. Scotland's chief medical officer, Catherine Calderwood, stepped down after she was caught making two trips to her second home. On Saturday (local time), when asked if he would resign, Mr Cummings said he acted responsibly and legally and scolded reporters outside his house for getting the 2016 Brexit referendum wrong. "Obviously not," he said of resignation. "You guys are probably all about as right about that as you were about Brexit: do you remember how right you all were about that?" Mr Cummings said. With a total of 260,916 confirmed cases and 36,875 dead, the United Kingdom has the worst official COVID-19 death toll in Europe ABC/Reuters 
