Has coronavirus killed our chance to stop climate change getting worse, or given us a opportunity to act?
Ian Dunlop worries about his grandchildren. He worries time is running out. "We run the risk within the next probably five to 10 years, that we may trigger irreversible tipping points in the climate system," he says. He used to be a fossil fuel industry executive. Now he advocates for action on climate change. Global warming of 1.5 degrees Celsius in the next 20 years or so is essentially baked in, according to the UN's climate body — and Ian fears it won't stop there. "Three degrees Celsius, the best national security experts in the world consider will be social chaos," he says. "You can already see that and what happened with our bushfires. You look at major events like that and the social fabric really starts to break down very quickly." But he's not without hope. We're currently living through a life-changing, economy-twisting event: a global pandemic. Ian sees our response to coronavirus as a dress rehearsal for a much bigger challenge. "The only way we can really address climate change now is by some form of emergency action," he says. "We've left it too late to move through what people have been calling a graduating transition." When we're on the other side of this emergency, will we have the ability and will to refocus on climate change? Can we rebuild a fragile economy while taking action? Or will coronavirus push the issue of climate change to the backburner? Kim Sinclair also worries about her children, but it's not climate change that's front of mind. "I worry more about how they're going to put food on the table. Will they have a roof over their heads? What opportunities do they have in front of them?" She lives in Moranbah in central Queensland — where the mines are everything. Most of the mines produce coking coal for export steel markets. Kim worked at one of them for eight years, her husband still does. For Kim and the people she knows, there's a lot of fear around climate change and just what "urgent action" would entail. "There's nothing for us to put any of our hopes on. And unfortunately, very rarely are we consulted in the process," she says. "It feels like our livelihoods, our control, our self-esteem, our everyday lives, that's being taken away from us. "There's no plan, there's no structure, there's no discussion. People are just left hopeless and scared and wondering what the future holds." More than a thousand kilometres south on the banks of the Hunter River sits another mining town, Singleton. Mayor Sue Moore's job includes planning for a future her town doesn't want to talk about. "Climate change is not being discussed here. Coal is very much still part of this area," she says. The science on climate change has long been settled, and it's unequivocal: the climate is changing and human emissions of greenhouse gases are to blame.  But that hasn't convinced Sue, who doesn't believe humans are causing the climate to change any faster. "I haven't seen anything that demonstrates to me that it is. That's my personal feeling." Coal mining directly accounts for 23 per cent of Singleton's workforce. The area is the biggest source of coal royalties for the NSW Government's coffers. Sue doesn't think mining will end any time soon — some mines in the area have the approvals for another 20 years at least. But in local government in the Hunter, "diversification" and "transformation" are important topics. Along with other councils in the region, Singleton is looking at opportunities like wind and solar. "There's so much potential there and we need to be ready for those opportunities as they present," Sue says. "The [community] doesn't want to talk about leaving coal … and we're not anti-coal by any means. But we want to be prepared for when coal may not be here any longer, which might be 50 years out." The UN's climate body says in order to stop global warming at 1.5C, the world must reach net zero emissions by 2050 — meaning any new emissions into the atmosphere are removed or offset. More than 70 countries around the world, every Australian state and territory, the Federal Opposition, and industry groups like the Business Council of Australia all support the target. ClimateWorks Australia, which was co-founded by Monash University, has researched how Australia could get there. Its plan would require: CEO Anna Skarbek says the next decade is make or break. "It's the decade that emissions not only need to turn around but need to halve worldwide, so that we can then halve emissions again the following decade and reach net zero the decade thereafter," she says. "If we don't do that, we will have emitted, cumulatively, too many emissions along the way. So that even if you did reach net zero emissions at some point in the future, we've already put too much into the atmosphere to make warming tip over those limits." Anna says so much of the technology needed to achieve the cut in emissions already exists. "We can in fact leapfrog to a zero emissions alternative for most technologies in most sectors," she says. She says one massive project shows how Australia could become a clean energy superpower. We've known about climate change for decades, but we've done relatively little in response. In this special four-part series, Richard Aedy finds out why. With a proposed size of 6,500 square kilometres, the Asian Renewable Energy Hub in WA's Pilbara region would be more than half the size of Greater Sydney. CWP Renewables' Alex Hewitt says through wind and solar it will generate 15 gigawatts of power, with the capacity to expand to 26 gigawatts. That, he says, would make it the largest power project in the world. "We're going to use the electricity to make hydrogen, which then is an energy source which can go into all sorts of end uses — from cars and trucks and hydrogen fuel cells to industry, agriculture, heating, shipping fuels." Alex says moving away from fossil fuels for power is just one step. "The other sectors — agriculture, industry, transport, buildings — are much harder to decarbonise, and that's where hydrogen comes into play," he says. "When you start crunching some of the numbers on how much green hydrogen … as a fuel would be needed to decarbonise these sectors, the world will need not one of these big projects, but hundreds." The consortium behind the estimated $40 billion project is about to break ground, after being given the green light by Western Australia's environmental watchdog. Alex is confident the hub will be exporting and supplying the Australian market by 2027. The Grattan Institute believes hydrogen is key to creating a new multi-billion dollar industry — manufacturing and exporting low emission or so-called "green" steel. In a new report it says the industry could create tens of thousands of jobs in areas currently reliant on coal like Central Queensland and the Hunter Valley, but argues a flagship project should be invested in now. Emma Heard heads the Investor Group on Climate Change — its institutional investor members collectively manage $2 trillion in funds. Like Alex, she says what's crucial isn't just investing in new opportunities, but getting companies that are already operating to "decarbonise". "We can't just switch off the economy we've got, we have to actually get the economy we've got to reduce emissions," she says. "So in between investing in whole new climate solutions and technologies or not investing in carbon intensive or high-risk technologies and industries, there's the bulk of the economy, which is everything we do every day." She says the finance industry — including banks, insurers and super funds — is a critical part of that. "I'm optimistic about what I'm seeing is actually happening across the sector," she says. "Is it enough? No. Is it fast enough? No. Is it hugely important and really influential? Yes." An hour's drive from Sue's town of Singleton is a business that's ticking some of the boxes of ClimateWorks' plan for reaching net-zero. Molycop makes steel balls that are used in mining equipment to grind down rock by tumbling it in what the company's Brett Allen likens to a giant steel can. Rather than making the balls from scratch, they're made from melting down local scrap steel. "From an environmental perspective, it's about a quarter of the carbon footprint of a traditional steel making method," Brett says. It's still an energy intensive process. Brett says the company's recently improved its environmental credentials by negotiating to ensure part of the power they buy is from wind and solar. He says sourcing power from renewables and making recycled steel product gives Molycop a commercial advantage over overseas suppliers, because Australian mines are interested in reducing their overall carbon footprint. "Offsetting just a little more than half of our electricity lowers our carbon footprint even further to one eighth of that of a traditional steel-making process. So that, we feel, gives us a competitive advantage," he says. The challenge of reaching net zero emissions was already an enormous one before the global pandemic. Australia is now tentatively emerging from months of coronavirus lockdown. Nearly 600,000 people lost their job last month, the government's shovelling tens of billions of dollars into its JobKeeper program to keep more than 800,000 businesses afloat, borders remain closed and a road back to a sense of normality for many is still not clear. Many other countries are yet to reach this point, or are doing so with the burden of death tolls many times higher than ours. Second or third waves of outbreaks could be around the corner. Grattan Institute program director Danielle Wood is concerned the crisis will push action on climate change to the backburner. "We're going to come out the other side in a much weaker position from an economic perspective, certainly from a government budget perspective," she says. "A slow-burn issue like climate change, as big and as important as it is, might look less pressing in the scheme of things. "A real concern … is that this issue just gets pushed further and further into the future, and we know that we need to act soon rather than later." ClimateWorks CEO Anna Skarbeck says while an economic downturn does make the task harder, the response to the pandemic offers opportunities. "Governments, banks, companies will be looking for how to stimulate the economy on the other side of this pandemic," she says. She says there are "shovel ready projects" and new technology ready to be invested in which will help reduce carbon. She says the JobKeeper program also shows how the government can support vulnerable people in a global crisis. "I'm encouraged by what we're seeing around this community response to the pandemic, that we could take the principles of that to support workers who are affected by the climate change crisis." Business Council of Australia chief executive Jennifer Westacott says for many people the main worry right now is their job. "But this issue won't go away because of this terrible crisis we're in," she says. "It's important that as we think about the economic recovery, we think make sure that the transition we have to make in our energy mix, our energy consumption, our energy supply, our use of renewables, our investment in new technologies, is front and centre in that debate. "Because it's the opportunity that I'm worried about that we're going to miss, particularly in regional communities." Emma Heard says while the challenges of climate change and coronavirus are very different, the common element is resilience. "Our communities [are] integrating and thinking about these issues into the decisions that we make every day, and actually looking ahead and planning for what we know is coming and looking at how we can best respond to it," she says. "Time frames are different but the size of the challenge and the kinds of responses that we need to be implementing are quite, unfortunately, quite similar." Ian Dunlop says any response can't just come from Australia. He sees two ways the impact of climate change will play out globally. "It will either result in countries moving into an extremely defensive position where they put up the barriers, you end up with 'Fortress Australia'," he says. "We all try and optimise our own personal possessions or national possessions which means we will probably not get on top of the problem. "We will spiral downwards into what will end up being global collapse. "The alternative is we recognise that this is a problem that the entire world has and we cooperate to unprecedented degrees to get on top of it. "If we do that I think we have a chance of handling it, provided we treat it as a genuine emergency." Get more stories that go beyond the news cycle with our weekly newsletter. 
