ACCC to investigate houseboat company 'refusing refunds' over coronavirus cancellations
The consumer watchdog is investigating a luxury houseboat company in northern Victoria after it refused to refund holidaymakers thousands of dollars for bookings lost to the COVID-19 outbreak. One would-be holidaymaker says he has been left $30,000 out of pocket Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) chair Rod Simms told ABC Statewide Drive about 20 people had complained they couldn't get their money back from Echuca Luxury Houseboats, even though the company had not provided the service because of coronavirus restrictions. Mr Simms described the company's behaviour as "appalling".  "The company should be treating its customers a lot more fairly than that," Mr Simms said. Insurance Broker Don McLardy said he paid almost $30,000 to use a houseboat over Easter but was unable to take the holiday because of travel restrictions. He said he was unable to get a response from Echuca Luxury Houseboats about his money. "We are quite happy to have a replacement trip next Easter or the Easter after that but we've had a lack of response and have pretty much been shut down from Echuca Houseboats," Mr McLardy said.  Gisborne local Suzette Hare said she spent $4,000 on a booking with the company but was told she was not entitled to a refund because she didn't have travel insurance.  "So there was no offer of a rebooking, which was what I was after," Ms Hare said. "No credit, no refund, no nothing." Queenslander Phil Beresford, said he was out of pocket $1,500 and was also told he needed travel insurance. He said he lodged a complaint with VCAT after the company refused to negotiate other options, like a voucher. "It's not their fault that this happened, and it's not our fault," Mr Beresford said. "But to say that we've got to take the full burden of it and that they were going to be fine, it just seems ludicrous and very unconscionable." Mr Simms said it was misleading to tell people they needed travel insurance to get a refund. "Most travel insurance won't cover this anyway. The bigger issue is what are the rights that these customers have," Mr Simms said. He said in most instances consumers did have a right to a refund. "The only times when you won't be entitled to that refund is when there are terms and conditions which specify another remedy, when the situation is outside the control of the company," he said. "(Then) they are entitled to a voucher that is actually usable." Mr Simms said the ACCC's priority in the investigation would be to get a fair deal for consumers. "We've dealt with literally dozens of companies, and we've got a lot of companies to change their policies and treat their customers fairly, so I'd like to think we've had a lot of success," Mr Simms said. He said there would be serious consequences if the company was found to have misled customers. "We can take them to court and the penalties can be up to $10 million," Mr Simms said. Ms Hare told ABC Statewide Drive that, since unhappy customers went public, the company had offered her a full voucher. "I am yet to make a decision about that," Ms Hare said. "This has been a very difficult situation that we have been in and it has not left me feeling very positive about a future booking with this business." Echuca Luxury Houseboats' owner Andrews McKenzie said the company was working in "good faith" to provide the best outcomes for customers. "We are in the process of drafting correspondence to our impacted customers, which will outline our offer of a voucher that they will be able to use over the next three years," Mr McKenzie said. 
