Coronavirus has cancelled major events and it may be a while before we are ready to return to crowds
Football without crowds, stadiums without concerts and festivals on the chopping block — COVID-19 has ushered in an uncertain new era for major public events. As restrictions ease and we make our way back to pubs, restaurants and public spaces, there are still many factors at play before we get back to our regular calendar of big events. One of the biggest hurdles to getting back in a crowd could be psychological. With constant reinforcement about physical distancing and staying in your 'bubble', have you found yourself briefly taken aback seeing people in crowds or close together in old photos or in TV shows? University of Queensland social psychology Professor Jolanda Jetten has experienced this and said it was an example of how rapidly we have accepted a new world of restrictions. "It tells you how quickly we've adapted our behaviours, how quickly we've seen closeness to others as something that's dangerous," she said. Professor Jetten said it would take some adjustment for people to return to big events. "The whole idea now of avoiding a crowd has almost become second nature," she said. "We've developed the habits of distancing and to overcome that habit, we're only willing to do that if we know it's 100 per cent safe." At the same time, Professor Jetten said she thought people had missed the feeling of belonging — and the sense of shared experience — that being in a crowd could foster. "I think people have been grieving to go back to normal, to go back to not just meetings with 10 other people, but also to be part of crowds and thousands of people that gather," she said. "We really are social animals, we love to be in a crowd, we love to be immersed — I really wonder how that will play out in the next couple of months." The logistics of planning an event long in advance are complex — and that's before you throw in the added uncertainty of what COVID-19 restrictions could look like. Hobart's Dark Mofo festival pulled the pin early on its 2020 event, saying a last-minute cancellation would have caused even more financial devastation. Perth's annual Australia Day Skyworks celebration, which draws hundreds of thousands of people on January 26 to the banks of the Swan River, was the subject of fierce debate earlier this week after the City of Perth announced it would consider not going ahead with the event, eight months out from the big day. Chair commissioner Andrew Hammond told ABC Radio Perth the commissioners had requested further reports on the event, which would be considered next month. "We simply don't know what the social distancing requirements are going to be at that time and I guess everybody can understand, if you've got 300,000 people sitting around the Swan River watching a fireworks show, there's going to be issues if there's social distancing requirements in place," he said. "If we let things go on as they are, we'll spend over $2 million for an event that might or might not go ahead." Kirsten Holmes, Curtin University's dean of research for the faculty of business and law, said the lead-in time for an event such as Skyworks was crucial. "The idea that we might not be able to get together in a big crowd come January is hard to envisage at the moment, because it seems like we've really got on top of the COVID situation," she said. "I can see why people are saying 'why on earth are they talking about cancelling it now, when it's so far out?' But they will be planning it … a decision has to be made." As AFL and NRL prepare players to get back on the field, University of Western Australia faculty of health and medical sciences executive dean Jon Watson said he was hopeful fans would be able to join them at stadiums later this year, provided there remained little to no community transmission of COVID-19. "Once we know there's no community transmission, the chance of someone going to an event that has the virus becomes very small," he said. "We know from the data on the virus that there's less risk from outdoor events than indoor events, so I think that something that happens in a big outdoor stadium would be more likely to go ahead than, for example, basketball indoors. "But we still need to think about physical distancing, we need to think about hygiene, there needs to be a robust cleaning schedule in place." Professor Watson said events without allocated seating — gatherings of crowds at festivals, or even golf, where spectators could walk around following competitors — would likely face a longer wait. "If someone's positive [for COVID-19], that's a different situation to someone going to a football game or a rugby game," he said. "I think [less controlled events] will probably be more difficult to police on a short-term basis. "In Australia we're going really well, but I think those more controlled events will come first." Australia's Chief Medical Officer, Brendan Murphy, has previously said distancing measures would likely stay in place until a vaccine could be found. With a vaccine still estimated to be a year away at best, some big gatherings look to be off the table in their usual form.  Major upcoming agricultural shows across Australia — including the Royal Melbourne and Adelaide shows, and Ekka in Brisbane — have been axed for 2020, with organisers of Perth's Royal Show cautiously looking on as September draws closer. Royal Agricultural Society of WA president Paul Carter told 6PR Radio a decision was likely from late May to late June. "As each day goes by, running the Royal Show in its traditional timeslot becomes less likely, even though we continue holding out slim hope," Mr Carter said. ABC health editor Norman Swan told triple j a return to music festivals should not be expected anytime soon, with Splendour in the Grass postponed from July to October. However, organisers are hopeful the Falls Festival will run as planned later in 2020. Professor Jetten said dense crowds brought the added problem of people underestimating risk. "At festivals, people engage in unsafe behaviours — sharing cups, unsafe sex behaviours, all sorts of things — because they see others as safe, 'we're all together, all good'," she said. "That's precisely what you should be concerned about with coronavirus." The experts agree a return to major events will look very different to anything we have seen before. Overseas, sporting codes that have emerged from behind closed doors have spaced out people in seats to ensure physical distancing. Professor Watson said he thought there would be changes in terms of queueing to get into big events, possible temperature screening and a need for stepped-up emergency care — along with spaced seating and asking people not to change seats to enable contact tracing. "We already have plans with medical services at major events, but I think there'll be an extra layer to that in terms of how we manage anyone if they suddenly become unwell and how they're taken from the event to a place of isolation in a hospital," he said. Beyond hygiene and health precautions, Professor Holmes said she could also see some environmental benefits on the way. "There's already a move within the sector towards not producing paper copies of anything — maybe doing away with wristbands, anything where people could be touching," she said. 
