Coronavirus 'border wars' reignite old state rivalries that date back to Federation
Paul Keating once famously said: "If you don't live in Sydney, you're just camping out." Sydneysiders cheered while noses across the rest of the country were put firmly out of joint. It's one episode in a longstanding rivalry between Australia's states that flared again this week as various premiers traded blows over coronavirus border restrictions. WA Premier Mark McGowan fired the first salvo, evoking the Ruby Princess debacle in response to NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian's calls for Western Australia, Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania to open up their borders. "And they are trying to give us advice on our borders, seriously?" he quipped. It followed another jibe from Mr McGowan last month when he responded to questions about a NSW man fined $1,000 for contravening social-distancing restrictions by eating a kebab. "I find it hard to believe someone was going for a run and then stopped to have a kebab," he said between chuckles. "In any event, they do things differently in NSW." Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk also stuck in the boot, telling NSW it was "not going to be lectured to" by a state with the highest number of coronavirus cases.  Social commentator Jane Caro says the coronavirus pandemic has strengthened existing state rivalries, particularly against NSW. "NSW seems to always be the state that everybody hates in the same way that Manly Warringah is the football team everybody hates as well," she says. But she says the animosity is not without reason. "I think it's fair to say if the Ruby Princess wasn't allowed to disgorge everyone on Sydney Harbour and go off to the four corners of Australia we'd have had hardly any cases, so maybe NSW has a little bit of ground to make up," she says. Acrimony between the states is nothing new. It's seen each year as various sporting codes take the field, as states vie for the tourism dollars and the prestige that comes with hosting international events.  And it's a rivalry as old as Federation itself, when long-standing competition between Sydney and Melbourne resulted in the country's two largest cities vying to become home to the nation's capital. The Constitution had the final say: Parliament would be located within NSW but not within 160 kilometres of Sydney. Until it was built, Australian Parliament would meet in Melbourne. Greig Pickhaver, one half of comedy duo Roy and HG, says coronavirus has "broken Australian society down into states in a way that I never thought would happen again". "I'd love the State of Origin series to be on now because never before in say the last decade and a half has the animosity between NSW and QLD been wound up so far — it would be a magnificent spectacle for rugby league fans," he says. "Who knows? The Sheffield Shield may become the best cricket competition in the world at this rate!" Caro likens the rivalry to "a bit like siblings in a family" and says it's mostly light-hearted. "They might really love you but if they get an advantage over you they're sure as hell going to leverage it as much as possible and tease you about it unendingly. "I totally accept that there's probably a little bit of delight in being able to say to NSW, 'Ooh I don't know if you guys can be trusted,'" she says. "The more infuriating NSW finds that, the more satisfying that probably is for some of the other states." Having lived in three different states across Australia, Miah Tutuki-Crockett knows interstate rivalry when she sees it. "There's always been a bit of a thing between NSW and Queensland," the 25-year-old says, citing rugby league as the main source of tension. Ms Tutuki-Crockett, 25, grew up in Perth and later moved to Noosa on Queensland's Sunshine Coast but says Sydney has captured her heart. "It's a great place — there's always lots of events going on music, the food is amazing here, so I really like Sydney." Asked if any of her interstate friends rib her for moving to NSW, like a true Sydneysider she replies: "No I feel like most of them end up moving here at some point anyway." 
