Our relationships are laid bare in coronavirus lockdown
Crouched in the back of the cab I have a choice: open the ABC News app and immediately inform myself of all the news I will need to know and broadcast that day or — in that gloom before dawn, and in those few moments I have to myself before the serious business of the day overwhelms me — do I open the Twitter account "Am I the Asshole"? This lockdown has revealed to us, and to those living with us, sometimes confronting truths about our deeper natures. People who had no intention of being so closely quartered have been thrown together by necessity and have spent more time, more intensely, with each other than maybe they ever have before. It's one way to cement a relationship. It's also one sure-fire way to burn the whole damn thing to the ground. This addictive, astonishing and sometimes quite unbelievable account (and there are many who think quite a deal of it is just made up) allows people to post to Reddit a personal dilemma about their behaviour which can then be discussed and voted on. The Twitter account @AITA curates some of the most intriguing. It turns out COVID-19 has brought about a global, real-time laboratory-condition series of psychological experiments that are now being written up — not by Harvard professors, but by freaked-out or deeply guilty partners in an all-access online forum. Journalism may be the first draft of history, but these posts are most certainly the key documents of a major sociological phenomenon. Some of the dilemmas are staggering. AITA for permanently deleting my girlfriend's Instagram account? For storming out of a dinner because they put potatoes in the chilli? For being mad that my boyfriend dedicated his book to OJ instead of me? For asking that my neighbour not bring her screaming baby outside? And in one of the greatest examples of narcissistic personality disorder you'll ever read, for taking my girlfriend's secret poetry that she doesn't want read and publishing it as a song? So many of the problems arise from two people suddenly living together. They bring their stuff — dolls, oversize soft toys, poetry, a total lack of maturity or empathy — and dump it all into the middle of a relationship that's just not ready for it. Or ready for anything at all. There are the man-babies, and the mean women and the selfish fathers, and punishing mothers. And while some of the posts are genuinely distressing cries from the heart — the wife who just wants her husband to get off the video games and look after their six-month-old — others are the primary material for what should become a modern treatise about a generation of people raised to be breathtakingly selfish. Yes, a lot of it is hilarious, but a great deal is also a fascinating insight into the biggest challenge that we all find ourselves in: where do my needs come right now? First or behind someone else's? Am I capable of re-ordering them? Check it out. Be as judgy as you like — that's what's it about — but then take a moment and ask yourself: are you one of them? Subscribe to join Virginia Trioli each Saturday morning for the best long reads, analysis and features from the ABC. This weekend we have evidence that some of us are trying very hard not to be that a-hole. Jack Gow is using COVID19 to get unapologetically closer to his male friends and change the dynamic of his friendships for the better. My colleague Madeleine Morris is trying to do her bit to reduce her family's carbon footprint by cutting out meat (but you try telling that to a bunch of tofu-refusing kids). And we have black cockatoos for you: the greatest bird in the Australian skies. No correspondence will be entered into on this. Thank you. Have a safe and happy weekend, whether by twos or 10s or 20s — and here's your weekly reminder THAT IT'S NOT OVER YET. Dear God, please keep your distance. Our over-talented but underemployed performers are doing what they do best for you this weekend — getting on with it, and the enduring treasure that is Belvoir has gathered cast from around the world to perform songs from many of their shows, sung by original cast members for Belvoir in Concert. If you tune in to watch, please donate just as you'd so love to buy a ticket and be there with them One of my secret loves, Virginia Gay — the woman who breathed life back into Calamity Jane in her show-stopping Australian performances — will be hosting this fabulous event. So wrap your arms around someone you love, tell them your heart's secret, and slow dance to this tonight. Virginia Trioli is presenter on Mornings on ABC Radio Melbourne and the former co-host of ABC News Breakfast. This article contains content that is not yet available here. 
