Taste of Tasmania set to be cancelled for 2020 amid coronavirus restrictions
The Taste of Tasmania, which has been a key event on the Hobart social calendar for more than 30 years, looks set to be cancelled for the first time in its history as a result of uncertainty around the coronavirus pandemic and the council's struggling finances.  Hobart City Council officers have recommended the event — which usually costs ratepayers about $1 million — not go ahead this year "due to the number of uncertainties for large events coupled with Council's need to reprioritise funding for the coming year". Officers said the event would be "difficult to justify" at a time when the Council "really needs the money elsewhere". The Taste of Tasmania runs between Christmas and New Year's Eve, and averages about 30,000 attendees each day.  It is also a focal point for the Sydney-to-Hobart yacht race with festivalgoers celebrating the finish and watching the rest of the fleet arrive. Race organisers are yet to make any announcements about this year's event. The Taste decision is another blow to festival tourism after the mid-winter event Dark Mofo was also canned this year.  Hobart Mayor Anna Reynolds said the council's revenue was expected to fall by $22 million, or almost 20 per cent of the council's budget, due to the pandemic.  "We are having to make cuts in a whole range of places," she said.  "Given commercial sponsorship of the Taste would probably be very hard to get this year it would just be too risky for our ratepayers to fund a Taste that might not be able to happen, might have to be really small, and might be still very risky in the current environment. "An event as large and complex as the Taste does need lead time, and given the uncertainty around the tourism industry, the rules around large gatherings, but also just our budget as a city ... it's really not practical to have the Taste this year." In a statement, the Tasmanian Government said its funding contribution to the event of $500,000 over two years was secure but urged the council to find an alternative. "Now is not the time to abandon such an important event for Tasmania and while it is still too early to determine whether an event that attracts that many people can go ahead, we would encourage the council to work with all relevant stakeholders to plan for and identify options that work for all," it said. The Tourism Industry is concerned cancelling the event could be the final straw for many small stallholders who rely on the event for their survival.  Daniel Leesong, chairman of the Tourism Industry Council Tasmania and operator of Coal River Farm, said the Taste was too important not to go ahead, and a private operator might need to step in.  Mr Leesong said if the council could not take responsibility for the event, the industry would need to band together to find an alternative model "simply because it's a marquee event that's so successful". "Many of the stallholders rely on the Taste for their significant revenue source for their annual turnover," he said.  "Not only is it going to have an immediate negative impact for a lot of the smaller stall holders, but it's also going to have a potentially fatal impact long term.  "Those businesses simply won't be able to survive." Ghost Rock Vineyard owner Alicia Peardon has been forced to shut her cellar door and eatery for the time being.  The north-west based business has a stall at the Taste every year, and Ms Peardon said the expected cancellation was disappointing but understandable.  "It's a huge impact for Tasmania and for producers like us because we do rely quite heavily on it, but it's not surprising either given the current circumstances," she said.  "As long as social distancing is around it's hard to see how events like that can go ahead." Council officers have recommended consideration be given to a smaller New Year's Eve event. "There is no doubt 2020 has been and will be an extremely hard year for our community and our businesses and a smaller celebration of this could be a fitting way to see out the year," the report said. A decision on whether the Taste goes ahead will be made by the council on Monday.  
