Home schooling during coronavirus overwhelmed many parents. Why your best was 'good enough'
Parents grappling with helping their children learn remotely during the coronavirus pandemic might breathe a little easier knowing the situation almost sent one of the country's most loved educators "berserk".  Children's author Mem Fox said it only took two days of trying to teach her grandchild maths to push her to the edge. Fox worked as an educator for decades but said it did little to prepare her for the frustration of teaching a primary school student how to multiply. "The methods of teaching have changed — we weren't taught the techniques they're using now so I was trying to learn while teaching and it made me feel like weeping with ineptitude," she said. Students in NSW and Queensland will head back to school full-time from Monday, ending eight weeks of remote learning for all children except those with parents who work in essential services. At the height of the coronavirus pandemic, school attendance rates were roughly 10 per cent in NSW. In Victoria, students in prep, Year 1, Year 2, Year 11 and Year 12 will return to school on Tuesday, May 26, and those from Year 3 to Year 10 are expected to return on June 9. WA students have already returned, after being ordered back into classrooms on May 18. A survey of 10,000 teachers found only 35 per cent of teachers felt students had adequate resources at home — including having a freely available adult on hand to assist, along with technology or even a desk. While the time spent at home varied from state to state, anecdotal evidence suggests many parents felt overwhelmed with their newfound responsibilities. Pasi Sahlberg, from the Gonski Institute at the University of NSW, assured parents that learning comes in many forms. "The cold fact is most of the information they're taught at school they forget anyway," he said. "If you did your best that's good enough." Professor Sahlberg, who is a renowned international education expert, said students' emotional wellbeing will be more important than their cognitive learning over the next few months. "They're probably not showing it but coping with the pandemic means there's a lot going through their little minds," he said. He said making sure children felt happy and safe was more important than catching up on missed lessons. Ms Fox wants parents and grandparents feeling inadequate to know their attempts at remote learning, were unlikely to have a lasting impact. "I think kids can go off for six months on a boat trip and come back and be fine," she said. The author said she "nearly went berserk" trying to home school her grandchildren and had a simple message for anyone who thinks parents did not need to become teachers during the pandemic. "That's absolutely crap," she said. "You can't be at home with your kids without taking on the teacher role — that's a contradiction in terms." "You had to guide, explain, unpick problems, encourage, challenge, be kind, be strict — everything a teacher had to do — without a four-year degree to prepare them." 
