Amalgamation talk begins again as coronavirus hits Tasmanian council coffers hard
When coronavirus hit Tasmania's communities, councils across the state rushed to help by freezing rates and cutting fees but, with coffers bare and staff stood down, it is becoming clear many councils will be the ones in need of aid. Key points:Tasmania's councils have frozen rates and created hardship packages, but it's meant a huge hit to their bottom lineMany councils are worried about how they'll pay staff and fund servicesThe financial situation has renewed calls for the State Government to reconsider its position on council amalgamationsTheir financial stress has seen renewed calls for the State Government to ditch its policy of voluntary amalgamations and finally force some councils to merge. It was mid-April when Premier Peter Gutwein and Local Government Minister Mark Shelton wrote to councils urging them "to do more". "We strongly encourage all councils to consider their individual packages and provide support to their community as a matter of urgency," they wrote. "It is vital that all councils agree to measures including rate increase freezes and generous hardship policies."The state's councils agreed to implement hardship packages — including delaying rates collections and waiving or deferring fees — and freeze rates for the 20/21 financial year. But not all councils could afford this or agreed with the rates freeze, with some mayors saying they felt forced into doing so. For Flinders Island Council, the rates freeze is putting some serious pressure on its finances. "To all councils [the freeze] is probably a big issue, a big burden. To us, it's just off the planet," Mayor Annie Revie said. The council has been in "a high-risk category financially" since 2018 and entered into the crisis with about $2 million in debt. The extra hit means the council may be forced to sacrifice some services. "It's something we're going to have to look at. We're going to have to involve our community in what sort of services can we afford," she said. This will be a question many councils across the state will now face and, depending on the council, the loss of services could range from a pause on council-supported events and grants to delays on infrastructure upgrades and slower reparation of things like roads and street lamps. On paper, councils are asset-rich — they own parks, roads and buildings — but few of them can be sold or, as Derwent Valley Mayor Ben Shaw put it, "you can't sell a footpath". Derwent Valley Council has about $800,000 in outstanding rates for this financial year and as part of the agreed-upon hardship package, they won't be chasing them. Cr Shaw said with the council's cash flow in "disarray" he was worried about paying staff leave entitlements. "We're around about the $1 million mark [in leave entitlements] on our books, which is a real concern. We need to have that cash available plus we need to have operation cash as well," he said. He does not know how they will keep the hardship package and implement a freeze on rates. "If it all comes in and all our rates come in, we'll be fine," he said. "It's the fact that there's no incentive for anybody for this next 12 months to pay their rates because we won't be chasing them and there's no interest accrual on them. "If everybody decides not to pay their rates, we will run out of cash."In contrast, the New South Wales State Government has moved to allow councils to increase rates to protect them from a downturn during the coronavirus crisis, a move applauded by the business community. The predominantly council-owned body TasWater has also had to freeze rates, meaning it has not paid the councils dividends for the past six months and is unlikely to pay any next financial year — money many of the smaller councils rely on. But it's not just regional councils that are struggling. Hobart City Council has estimated that by the end of the financial year it will be down $10 million in revenue and next financial year, the worst case scenario will see it down $22 million. "We have similar challenges that most capital cities have because we all have a greater percentage of the hotels, hospitality and retail ratepayers and they're the ones that are struggling and asking for assistance," said Lord Mayor Anna Reynolds. The council has borrowed $20 million for operational purposes, including paying their staff. "Not getting access to JobKeeper was a significant blow to us, but also to local governments right around the country," said Cr Reynolds. While it initially paid all staff, Hobart's council has been forced to stand some of them down and next year's budget is likely to be more about maintenance than new projects. "We just have to make sure that we've got enough money to maintain what we have; that means there'll be less money for either new initiatives, new infrastructure or potentially some of those special festivals and events that the City of Hobart has been able to support in the past," she said. Amalgamation talk returnsTasmanian Chamber of Commerce and Industry chief executive Michael Bailey said with councils' finances in trouble, it is time the State Government reconsidered its policy on council amalgamations. "We've reached the stage where there are several councils across Tasmania who are really going to struggle to make it work, even in the medium term," he said. "It seems that amalgamating is the only way that we're going to get sensible local government in these areas."The financial case, for at least some mergers, has already been made. Tasmania has 29 councils for a population of just over 520,000 — by comparison Brisbane has one council for a population of 2.5 million. Feasibility studies commissioned in 2015 by then-local government minister Peter Gutwein found merging the four Greater Hobart councils — Hobart, Kingborough, Glenorchy and Clarence — would save $19 million per year. The creation of a great south-eastern council — which would include Clarence, Tasman, Sorell and Glamorgan Spring Bay — would save $7.6 million per year. The Government has shown a reluctance to force amalgamations, but Mr Bailey said that reform is now urgent. "What we'll see here, if we're not careful, are councils not exactly amalgamating, but almost bankrupting," he said. "Rather than neighbouring councils standing around waiting for the keys to be handed to them, what I'd prefer to see is a more strategic approach.""It makes a lot more sense for there to be strategy leading into these sorts of things rather than a collapse of a council, which I think we could genuinely be seeing in a couple of council areas across the state."But Cr Revie said she was "adamantly" against it. "We're short of money, but I believe that council in a small place like this means much more than money."In a statement, Local Government Minister Mark Shelton said the Government's position has not changed and "significant local government reforms stand the best chance of succeeding when processes are voluntary". "Councils are well-equipped to make decisions regarding how they respond to and recover from the economic effects of the coronavirus pandemic and if councils determine this should include conversations on amalgamation, then the Government will work with them on their ideas," he said.
