Former White House butler Wilson Roosevelt Jerman, who served 11 US presidents over 55 years, dies from coronavirus
A former White House butler who served 11 US presidents over more than five decades has died at the age of 91 from coronavirus. Wilson Roosevelt Jerman succumbed to COVID-19, prompting glowing tributes from former first families. More than 95,000 Americans have died from coronavirus since February, with more than 1.61 million confirmed cases across the US. Mr Jerman's career began in 1957 with the Dwight Eisenhower administration and ended under Barack Obama in 2012. He performed a variety of roles during 55 years at the White House, including cleaner, lift operator, butler and maitre d'. "With his kindness and care, Wilson Jerman helped make the White House a home for decades of first families, including ours," said former first lady Michelle Obama.  "His service to others — his willingness to go above and beyond for the country he loved and all those whose lives he touched — is a legacy worthy of his generous spirit." Mr Jerman was promoted from cleaner to butler during the presidency of John Kennedy when first lady Jackie Kennedy noticed his professionalism. "[Jackie Kennedy] was instrumental in ensuring that that happened," his granddaughter Jamila Garrett told Fox 5 in Washington. Former president George W Bush and first lady Laura Bush said that Mr Jerman was a "lovely man." "He was the first person we saw in the morning when we left the residence and the last person we saw each night when we returned," the Bushes said in a statement. Hillary Clinton remembered Mr Jerman as a White House employee who added a human touch to his daily duties. "Bill and I were saddened to hear of the passing of Wilson Roosevelt Jerman at the age of 91 from COVID-19," she tweeted. "Jerman served as a White House butler across 11 presidencies and made generations of first families feel at home, including ours." During more than half a century in the White House, Mr Jerman witnessed many changes in US race relations, culminating in Mr Obama becoming the first black president in 2008. Ohio State University's Koritha Mitchell, author of From Slave Cabins to the White House, said that Mr Jerman was seen as an important figure in the history of African Americans in US political life. "That must have felt like a victory," Ms Mitchell said of Mr Jerman's time in the Obama White House. When he left his position in 2012 at the age of 83, Mr Jerman was honoured by Mr Obama with a series of plaques, for each of the 11 presidents he had served. When Mr Jerman began his White House career in 1957, the first frisbee had just been sold in US stores, Robert Menzies was Australian Prime Minister and the Asian Flu pandemic was claiming over 150,000 lives worldwide. ABC/Wires 
