Victoria coronavirus cases rise by 12, including another five linked to Cedar Meats cluster
Victoria has recorded another 12 coronavirus infections, including five linked to an outbreak at the Cedar Meats abattoir. It brings the number of cases linked to the abattoir in Brooklyn, in Melbourne's west, to 111 including 67 staff and 44 close contacts. The rise in cases means Victoria has been responsible for the majority of Australia's reported cases during the past week — 53 of 73 cases reported by Friday morning.  Four of the new diagnoses were detected in hotel quarantine and two through community screening programs. The other case is still under investigation. There are 93 active coronavirus cases recorded in Victoria, with 10 people in hospital, including five in intensive care units. The State Opposition said it was increasingly concerned about the growing cluster of cases linked to Cedar Meats and continued to push for an independent investigation. "This cluster gets worse and worse every day," Opposition Leader Michael O'Brien said. While Health Minister Jenny Mikakos earlier said it had been handled "absolutely perfectly", Mr O'Brien said "111 infected people tells you this has been a shambles". Education Minister James Merlino said about 10,000 school staff had been tested as the state prepares to resume face-to-face teaching on Tuesday. "I'm just so pleased that around 10,000 education staff so far have gone and got tested and not one has come back with a positive result," he said. Mr Merlino said health authorities had identified 171 infections which could indicate community transmission, an increase of three since Thursday, out of a total 1,593 positive COVID-19 cases in Victoria. Meanwhile, Victoria Police issued only eight fines to people breaching coronavirus restrictions since 11:00 pm on Sunday, after conducting 3,839 spot checks on homes, businesses and non-essential services. There are only five reasons to leave your home in Victoria — shopping for things you need, accessing medical services or caregiving, attending work or education that cannot be done from home, exercise and some recreational activities, and visiting family and friends. Up to five visitors are allowed at your home and gatherings of up to 10 are allowed outdoors in public for non-contact sport and recreation, but you must maintain 1.5 metres between yourself and others. The State Opposition has criticised the Government's decision to slowly ease restrictions, as other states push ahead with opening restaurants and relaxing travel rules. The Melbourne Cricket Club (MCC) has announced it will offer a 30 per cent discount for members, with the president conceding it was "unlikely" fans would be able to watch AFL matches during the 2020 season. The club has about 130,000 members and a further 215,000 on waiting lists, with annual fees for metropolitan-based adults ranging between $360 to $715. Updated Sunday, May 24 Membership grants fans automatic access to most AFL and cricket games at the MCG, as well as a seat in the members' stand. "Our revenue model is dramatically compromised as a result of the crisis and the revenue from managing the ground will not return in any significant form until crowds at games can return," MCC president Michael Happell said. The 30 per cent discount will apply to the club's upcoming 2020/21 season, which begins on September 1. Further discounts would be offered to members who could show they had suffered financial hardship, Mr Happell said. The decision comes as some AFL clubs and Adelaide Oval members have been offered full refunds on 2020 memberships, with the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission saying it will "monitor issues relating to sport club membership refunds, credits and ongoing charges". Speaking on ABC Radio Melbourne, MCC chief executive Stuart Fox said the reaction from members to the proposal had been "overwhelmingly positive". While many regard the club and its Members Pavillion as the posh section of the MCG, Mr Fox dismissed suggestions they were "elitist". "They're hard-working Australians, who have joined the club because they love sport," he said. "They're the same as AFL members. They're the same as sporting club members." "Anyone can join the Melbourne Cricket Club. You can put your name down at birth. We don't discriminate, it's access for all. I think it's factually incorrect to call us elitist in any way." The AFL season is set to resume on June 11, however fans will not be permitted at games for the foreseeable future. 
