Toddler's brain tumour sparks fear patients in coronavirus quarantine won't seek help
Hours before doctors diagnosed 15-month-old Ingrid Newman with a life-threatening brain tumour, her mother agonised over whether to take the toddler to hospital. The pair had travelled from Cooktown to Cairns for medical tests when the toddler suddenly stopped walking early last month.  But when the tests were complete, they had to quarantine for two weeks under police and military guard before they could return home.  The rules apply to anyone wishing to enter Cape York under Federal Government legislation designed to protect vulnerable communities from COVID-19.  Ingrid and her mother, Belle Newman, were 10 days into their quarantine period when the toddler had a sudden violent seizure and started frothing at the mouth.  Ms Newman called a nurse straight away, but said she agonised over whether to break quarantine and send her daughter to hospital.  "I am really glad we did go because otherwise we wouldn't have known about this tumour and it could have gotten much worse," she said.  The family is now in Brisbane, where Ingrid is about to start chemotherapy at the Queensland Children's Hospital.  But the frightening experience has sparked fear other Cape York patients may delay seeking urgent medical help because they don't want to break isolation rules in place under the Biosecurity Act.  "I definitely do believe there are some people that would be putting it off and thinking it might just go away instead of getting help ... because they don't want to be stuck," Ms Newman said.  "I was very reluctant to have to start the two weeks quarantine again."  A Queensland Health spokesman said all public patients, carers and families were screened before going into quarantine to ensure they were fit and ready to complete the two weeks. "We have medical staff available from 8:00am to 10:00pm daily to respond to any medical episodes that might be suffered during quarantine," he said.  "If anyone requires any medical care they will receive it immediately." The spokesman said quarantine requirements were in place to protect First Nations communities from COVID-19.  Since the legislation passed in late March, more than 150 people have completed quarantine in government-funded accommodation in Cairns and returned to their communities on Cape York.  A further 160 are currently undergoing the process.  Ms Newman said being stuck in a hotel apartment with her toddler, unable to go outside, had been extremely difficult.  "One of the things we do to calm my daughter down when she's having a meltdown is we go outside and touch the trees," she said.  "I just couldn't do that, and of course she was being very agitated by this thing growing in her head." Other families have spoken about the mental health implications of having to quarantine in hotel apartments after childbirth. They've asked to be allowed to fly home and quarantine for two weeks when there.  A Queensland Health spokesman asked for understanding from patients and their families during "exceptional times".  "We regret any temporary and short-term inconvenience experienced by individuals and families required to comply with mandatory Commonwealth biosecurity quarantine requirements prior to returning to their Cape York or Torres Strait communities," he said.  "All people undergoing quarantine ... are accommodated in fully serviced apartments with individual kitchens and other facilities.  "They receive meals delivered to their doors three times a day and can also order additional items though reception. "They are also able to order in Uber eats, have supermarket deliveries made, or have friends and family members drop off supplies and other items for them if required.  "We recognise the concerns of patients and their families about the process, but we ask for their understanding on the need to manage their return safely and with the minimum of risk to their communities." Next week, 15-month-old Ingrid will start six weeks of chemotherapy to reduce the size of her brain tumour so that it can be removed.  Ms Newman, who's 26 weeks' pregnant with her second child, said she was grateful for the support she'd received from Queensland Health.  "In a way it was good we were in Cairns (and not Cooktown), because the help was on our doorstep," she said.  A shunt in Ingrid's head is now relieving pressure from the tumour. "It's been very overwhelming but she's such a little fighter," Ms Newman said.  "She's starting to be able to walk again and move around without any pain, and she's back to her normal, happy, cheeky self. "How she's been improving since they put the shunt in is giving us all a lot of hope." 
