No cap on commuter numbers on Queensland public transport despite coronavirus concerns over physical distancing limitations
With all Queensland students returning to the classroom on Monday, the public transport network in the state's south-east is set to face a key coronavirus physical-distancing test. In New South Wales, the State Government announced maximum numbers of passengers on buses and trains. However, Queensland Transport Minister Mark Bailey said there was currently no need to introduce capacity limits and commuters needed to use "common sense". Mr Bailey said patronage on public transport had plummeted by 77 per cent during the pandemic, and even with school returning in full, social distancing was not a problem. "There is no issue at the moment in terms of social distancing — there is a lot of space there for people," Mr Bailey said. "[Quotas] is not something that we believe is necessary at this point, and the risk in Queensland is considerably lower than New South Wales where community transmission is much more common. "We're cognisant of the fact that when schools go back fully next week there will be an increase in passengers, but again, people are not going to just go back to how they worked before." University of Queensland virologist Ian Mackay said Queensland appeared to be keeping the situation under control, and while children could be infected with COVID-19, they seemed to be affected less severely. "The experiment goes on with us returning back to normal, as much as we can, while keeping that physical distance," Associate Professor Mackay said.  Patronage levels will be monitored.(Supplied: Queensland Government) Authorities said cleaning on public transport vehicles had increased in response to coronavirus. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Passengers are not allowed to use cash to buy a ticket and bus commuters must board via the rear door. "[We're also] ensuring [passengers] are aware of how to socially distance and those communications will increase in coming days," Mr Bailey said. Transport Workers Union (TWU) Queensland branch secretary Peter Biagini said the union would also like to see some seats blocked off to help ensure physical distancing. He said safe social distancing needed to be maintained on public transport, but drivers should not have to be the ones to enforce it. "Members of the public need to pitch in to ensure that there is social distancing happening on public transport — if we all do our bit we can come out of this stronger," he said. "We have been campaigning on having screens installed for the drivers for years to stop them being assaulted and spat on — if we had these in already then our members would be much more comfortable at work during this pandemic. "We will continue to push for 10 days of special pandemic leave for any driver who has been possibly exposed to COVID-19 so that they can self-isolate without worrying about paying the bills." Associate Professor Mackay said air-conditioning systems on public transport vehicles helped dilute any viruses and said he was not sure if limiting seats was necessary, given the position Queensland was in. Latest information from Queensland Health. But both Mr Bailey and Brisbane Lord Mayor Adrian Schrinner said patronage levels would be monitored. "If there are issues arising, that's something we're happy to have a look at," Cr Schrinner said. "Ultimately it does require people just to use a bit of common sense to make sure they are as safe as possible." Mr Bailey said extra train services could be added during shoulder peak hours to help give passengers more space. "It will be different to how it was before the pandemic and we'll be monitoring that closely and if we need to make adjustments to that, we will," he said. He said extra cleaning services had been brought on as a precaution. "We've had very strong measures in place since the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic — things like cashless ticketing, rear door boarding on our buses, tripling of cleaning on our trains and we've seen cleaning and hygiene routines right across our modes increase considerably." P&C Queensland chief executive Kevan Goodworth said catching public transport needed to be managed, but he had not heard of any complaints or concerns from parents on the issue. "I think this will come out in the wash next week when we see what happens," Mr Goodworth said. "We are encouraging parents to talk to the schools. "Schools are back on Monday and that's where [the students] need to be." 
