Africa has not been hit hard by coronavirus yet, but the disease could 'smoulder' there for years
Oluwaseun Ayodeji Osowobi left London triumphant and exhausted, but satisfied. She had gone to the UK to lobby for her Nigerian organisation, Stand to End Rape, and be the flag bearer at the annual Commonwealth Day ceremony. She even met Prince Charles at a glamorous reception in London. But on the plane back to Lagos in mid-March, Ms Osowobi started to feel extremely ill. "I thought that maybe I had malaria, maybe I was tired because I'd had a busy week… I didn't think it was coronavirus," she told the ABC.  The symptoms worsened when she got home.  "I was experiencing diarrhoea, I was vomiting, I was nauseous, I couldn't eat, I lost my sense of taste … it was a very tough period for me," Ms Osowobi said.  The 29-year-old, who is a prominent campaigner against sexual violence in Nigeria, had heard about the global spread of coronavirus and quickly got herself tested.  The positive result made her one of the African continent's first confirmed cases of COVID-19.  "It was new in Nigeria. I was the third case and the first female, actually… and it was very scary," she said. Her case of COVID-19 was so bad that she became fearful she might die.  "With the number of deaths recorded globally, I was almost certain I might not pull through, surviving the virus." But when she recovered and went public with her experiences, she was attacked online and accused of lying.  With the backing of health authorities and international agencies, she released a video urging others to practice social distancing and get themselves tested.  "I was the first person actually in Nigeria to come forward about surviving COVID-19 and I had photos, I had evidence to back up my story," she said. "When that video was published people still said 'how much was I paid by the government?', 'what kind of lie was I sharing online?', so it was very sad to read that." In Nigeria, like a number of countries in Africa, many people were sceptical about the virus, suspecting governments were exaggerating the threat.  Myths circulated in Nigeria that the disease only affected rich people or would be killed by hot weather. "It is reflecting an attitude of disbelief and lack of trust in the system," Ms Osowobi said of her doubters. "They thought the Government was using the virus to embezzle money or get donations." Coronavirus has been slow to spread across Africa, but Ms Osowobi's experience shows some of the challenges the continent could face when COVID-19 takes hold.  There are about 85,000 confirmed cases of African COVID-19, according to the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. For a continent with more than one billion residents, that's a comparatively low infection rate.  Meanwhile, the United States has more than one million cases of COVID-19 among its 328 million citizens.  The World Health Organisation says transmission rates have been much lower in Africa than elsewhere because of poor transport networks and low levels of economic integration.  Several African nations also implemented restrictions early on in the pandemic, according to the WHO's Emergency Operations Manager in Africa, Dr Michel Yao. "Some countries even started the measures before receiving cases so this could have slowed down the process," Dr Michel Yao told the ABC.  "Most of the first cases were imported so it was within a certain class of people who can afford to travel. It was not in the high-density places where the disease can spread faster." Dr Yao says the outbreak has not yet reached many rural areas.  "We face a situation that the number of cases is increasing as detection capacity increases, but it's not at the level that was experienced in China or Europe or the USA," he said.  Some African countries have even reported the number of active cases dropping to zero, but Dr Yao told the ABC that does not mean authorities could relax.  "We are very worried about 24 countries in sub-Saharan Africa and also Algeria. Half of them have community transmission and this is our main worry," he said. "If this community transmission moves into the high-density areas the situation could change, so we are not saying the situation is under control." The slow spread had led the WHO to predict the disease could "smoulder" in Africa, meaning localised outbreaks could continue for years. Some fear that if the rest of the world moves on while Africa continues to suffer from outbreaks, that would lead to greater travel restrictions, increased economic hardship and irregular migration to Europe and elsewhere. A massive testing and tracing effort is underway to prevent the disease from becoming entrenched. The Africa Centres for Disease Control (CDC) says health authorities will test 10 million people over the next six months. The CDC deputy director Dr Ahmed Ogwell Ouma said he doubted African nations would become a reservoir for COVID-19 because of their experience dealing with epidemics like the outbreaks of Ebola.  "We are way more prepared than many countries in the world and we are prepared because we have had huge epidemics before," he said. "We are going to get a very good control over this virus in a shorter time than others have done, simply because we have learnt lessons from previous outbreaks and we are using those lessons to try to contain the spread of the virus," he said.  African nations have some of the lowest rates of intensive care beds per capita, but few countries have faced excessive demand yet.  The WHO said this is because African nations have a much younger population than Europe and the US. In some countries, only 2 per cent of the population is above the age of 60.  They have also pointed out that some nations have recorded high rates of asymptomatic cases and low numbers of cases with severe complications. But there are countries where a questionable government response could be clouding the extent of the crisis. In Tanzania, President John Magufuli has refused to shut places of worship, while also casting doubt on testing and questioning the danger of the virus. Tanzania's Government has not reported new case figures since April 29. Meanwhile, in Burundi, the country's repressive Government expelled the WHO team after facing criticism for its lax response to the pandemic. Burundi pressed ahead with an election on May 20 despite the presence of the disease.  Many countries still have active conflicts, making it difficult for health authorities to implement containment and testing.  Even once African nations get through the pandemic, they could face another crisis: a lack of food caused by economic disruptions and lockdowns, which have come at the same time as locust plagues and drought in East Africa.  Joseph Siegel, the director of research for the Africa Centre for Strategic Studies, studied the effects of the Spanish flu pandemic on African nations and found that starvation was widespread.  "The bulk of the pandemic happened in 1918 but a lot of the famine and near-famine conditions happened in 1919, so I think for Africa we want to be keeping an eye on food production and helping to protect that," Mr Siegel said. "With so many people living off subsistence wages now, the food crisis is already affecting people."  
