Olympic champion Mo Farah faces renewed doping suspicions following British TV investigation
As the coronavirus works its way across the globe, the possibility that the Olympics will be postponed for the first time since World War II seems real. Meanwhile, a more routine spectre hovers over the five-ringed circus — the notion that some of the greatest performances produced on the grand Olympic stage are not real. Even before the 1988 Seoul Games — where Ben Johnson was so juiced up his eyes leaked stanozolol when he watched a sad movie — we were accustomed to the possibility the highest-profile Olympic performances were a pharmaceutical hoax. From the bearded female shot putters of the Cold War era to the more recent disgrace of countries such as Russia, we have been conditioned to the notion of systematic cheating — especially when it came from the other side of the geopolitical fence. But now, more often, we see but do not quite believe even some of the most romantic tales from the Olympics. There was no more heart-warming moment at the 2012 London Olympics than when Mo Farah celebrated his victories in the 5,000 metres and 10,000 metres before a euphoric crowd with his endearing Mobot gesture. As Cathy Freeman celebrated her Indigenous Australian heritage in Sydney 12 years earlier and allowed us to share her pride, Farah symbolised the joys of Britain's multicultural society against the rising tide of the navel-gazing nationalism that would soon deliver Brexit. To be in London's Olympic stadium when Farah twice breasted the tape was to see Great Britain briefly united in purpose and celebration. Which is why the suspicion surrounding Farah since his long-time coach Alberto Salazar was suspended for four years for "orchestrating and facilitating prohibited doping", creates such trepidation. The BBC's investigative program Panorama aired an episode titled "Mo Farah and the Salazar Scandal" earlier this week, which included admissions that the four-time Olympic gold medallist Farah used a performance-enhancing substance, although not necessarily in banned quantities. The crux of the accusation against Farah is that he was injected with L-carnitine before the 2014 London Marathon on Salazar's instructions. L-carnitine is a naturally occurring amino acid that the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) has banned in dosages of more than 50ml in the space of six hours. There has been no accusation made or evidence produced that Farah used more L-carnitine than is allowed before the London Marathon or any other event. But Farah's initial denial he used the substance and the circumstances surrounding its administration arouse suspicion. Farah's case came to light during the United States Anti-Doping Agency's (USADA) investigation into Salazar, the head of the Nike Oregon Project where Farah trained throughout his two successful Olympic campaigns. Since Salazar's conviction the British champion has suffered guilt by association, unfairly so in some eyes given there has been no evidence his four Olympic gold medals are tainted. But it has now been revealed that during a five-hour interview with USADA in London, Farah repeatedly denied using L-Carnitine before the London Marathon, only to change his story after a conversation with UK Athletics head of endurance Barry Fudge minutes after leaving the interview room. Fudge, it transpired, had travelled to Switzerland on Salazar's instructions to collect L-carnitine from the coach's supplier, an extremely unusual task for a British coach that had not been disclosed in previous enquiries. Last year, Farah strongly criticised the media, who he claimed was unfairly destroying his reputation because of his association with Salazar. But while none of the dots assembled by Panorama condemned Farah, when they are put together they create — at best — some confusion around Farah's credibility. Farah's lawyers have issued a statement in which they claim he was "one of the most tested athletes in the UK, if not the world" and that "interviews are not memory tests". But the Lance Armstrong case has diminished the "I've been tested hundreds of times" defence, given that investigation — rather than the testing often successfully dodged by many drug cheats — is now the most common means of nailing high-profile dopers. To some in British track and field, Farah already stands accused of breaching the "spirit of the sport" by his use of L-carnitine. The distance star's defenders might quite understandably respond that athletes who are being asked to follow both the literal WADA guideline around the use of supplements and this more ethereal "spirit of sport" code, are intolerably burdened. But, sadly, we live in an age where the innocence of sport has been lost. A time symbolised by the millions of now long-discarded yellow Livestrong wristbands and the hatches constructed in the Russian laboratories from which tainted drug samples were smuggled. This does not justify a rush to judgement of those such as Farah, who is so far accused only of using an amino acid that is legal in small quantities. On the contrary, Farah's case should for now remind us to be careful that the natural scepticism created by so many fallen heroes is not overtaken by the wilful blindness of outright cynicism. We must also avoid blind parochialism. The cloud hovering over some of British sport's most meritorious and raucously celebrated sporting achievements, including those of its storied cyclists, might seem ironic to those Australians who heard the chants of the English crowds during the last Ashes series — "Same old Aussies, always cheating". But in modern sport, if you throw the doping stone, you can very quickly find yourself in a glasshouse. 
