Healthcare costs in the United States can leave Americans in debt, in court and living on the brink
Zann Nelson was having lunch with a friend when she suddenly started bleeding. In the bathroom, it looked like a heavy period, which made no sense, given she had not menstruated in a decade. Panic began bubbling up inside her as she rushed to see a doctor. Not only was she suddenly grappling with her own mortality, Zann was also terrified about what it could cost. Like millions of other Americans, she had no health insurance and in the land of the free there is only a very limited safety net. Medical bills are a big contributor to personal bankruptcy cases. "Before I was diagnosed, they handed me a little piece of paper to sign," Zann said. "The surgeon told me, 'don't worry about the money, we need to focus on your health,' and I thought, OK great, they're going to help me."  The diagnosis was uterine cancer and the surgeon's solution was a radical hysterectomy to remove Zann's uterus before the growth spread. The operation was a success. But within weeks, a series of bills began appearing in the mail — some from imaging, some from doctors and some from the hospital itself. The total cost of $45,000 was far more than Zann could afford, even on a monthly payment plan. She was sued by the local health system and fought back in court, but ultimately lost the case. The hospital put a claim on her family farm where Zann had lived most of her life, and she had to sell land to pay back the debt. "My case all came down to that little piece of paper with tiny writing, which was a contract," she said. "They denied not telling me about the cost and saying the things they did. The judge actually stated that I could have chosen to refuse the surgery." Stories like Zann's are a big reason healthcare is the top issue for many voters in this US election year. In 2019, one study found about 137 million Americans had faced some sort of financial stress due to medical costs.  The price of insurance has dominated debates between the Democrats vying to become Donald Trump's opponent in November. Even those with coverage who work full time are not immune from crippling, surprise bills. Amanda Sturgill is still thousands of dollars in debt due to co-payments from her teenage daughter's back surgery four years ago. "My daughter Makayla was getting my youngest child out of the bath and suddenly she had the worst pain she'd ever felt in her life," Amanda said. After various tests, doctors finally diagnosed Makayla with degenerative disc disease and recommended an operation. Amanda earns about $18 an hour and because she was insured through her employer, assumed she would be OK. But she was not prepared for all the out-of-pocket costs, and after falling behind, a sheriff turned up at her house with a court summons.  She was being sued for about $3,800. Amanda is currently going through a divorce and raising four children. Due to her debt payment plan and her daughter's ongoing treatment costs, there are weeks when she struggles to make ends meet. "It's very stressful. I ration medication. I've sold every piece of jewellery that I have. I have nothing left," Amanda said. "A lot of times, I'll go all day long and I won't eat, I save food for the kids." In a last-ditch effort to turn their financial situation around, some Americans file for bankruptcy. The precise number of medical bankruptcies is hotly disputed because people usually have multiple financial issues when they file, but lawyers say healthcare costs are a common factor. "About half of my cases each month have medical bills as a large factor. Usually those clients don't have health insurance or they have bad health insurance," bankruptcy lawyer Marshall Slayton said.  Mr Slayton said more Americans appeared to be forgoing health insurance altogether. "What you see is people take a risk. They say it's more important for me to put food on the table and have a car … than have health insurance," he said. "For some people, the gamble works out and for some people, it doesn't."  Academics have long warned the high price of care can have social consequences too. Right now, as authorities work to prevent the spread of the deadly coronavirus around the United States, there are concerns some uninsured people with mild cases may not seek treatment, due to the potential cost. The Miami Herald reported that one man who developed symptoms after returning from China in January could now owe thousands, after getting tested for coronavirus in hospital and being diagnosed with just the flu. All the Democrats trying to win the party's presidential nomination have put forward plans to reduce the risk of surprise medical bills. Former vice-president Joe Biden wants to expand the existing Affordable Care Act — which is also known as Obamacare — to include more Americans, further subsidise insurance premiums and drive down the cost of medicine. But current frontrunner Bernie Sanders is promising a universal, publicly funded Medicare For All insurance program that would cover all US residents with virtually no out-of-pocket costs. It would be a more generous health system than Australia's, even including free dental coverage. It would also reduce the number of uninsured Americans from about 8.8 per cent to nearly zero. Although the total price and net impact on national health expenditure are currently being ferociously debated, many forecasters predict it would cost the US Government roughly $46 trillion over a decade. "That's a reasonable middle estimate in a big range," said Marc Goldwein from the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, a Washington DC-based thinktank. "To put that in context, you'd have to double all income taxes or essentially double the national debt to pay for that." Some Democrats fear campaigning on Medicare For All at a general election could be politically tricky and it seemingly has little chance of getting through Congress unchanged. The healthcare industry is incredibly influential and for Americans with good insurance, the quality of care they receive is world class. "America currently attracts the best and brightest doctors and specialists from around the world because they earn very good wages," said Ge Bai from Johns Hopkins Carey Business School. "Research and medical discoveries here save lives everywhere and some in the industry fear Medicare for All could slow that innovation." But both Zann Nelson and Amanda Sturgill say something has to change in the coming years to ensure fewer people end up in their situation. Zann is a lifelong Democrat and is hoping a moderate like Joe Biden will win the White House this year. "You just have to look around the world to know that our health system does not make sense," she said at her farm north of Charlottesville. "It's a human right to be healthy and I think we should work on improving Obamacare." Amanda is likely to back self-described Democratic socialist Bernie Sanders, largely because of his Medicare For All plan. She even recently decided to appear in advertisements promoting the policy. Her family lives in a former coal mining area, near the border of Virginia, Tennessee and Kentucky, a region that is pro-Donald Trump. "I voted for [Republican President] George W Bush. I change my vote," she said. "People here hate Democrats but I think they hate Bernie Sanders a bit less. He thinks about working Americans." 
