Tasmania news: Bandidos member charged over theft, basketball announcement imminent
Here's what you need to know today: Two men allegedly involved with the Bandidos motorcycle gang have been charged in relation to the theft of $5,000 in building materials from a Devonport motel. Tasmania Police said they conducted a search at the Bandidos clubhouse on February 26, following the theft the previous day at the Argosy Motel. "A 32-year-old Bandidos outlaw motorcycle gang member and a 39-year-old Bandidos associate have been charged with stealing," police said, adding as a result of the search, "all of the stolen property has been recovered". Both men have been charged with stealing and have been bailed to appear in the Devonport Magistrates Court on April 20. Anyone with further information is urged to contact Tasmania Police on 131 444, or Crime Stoppers anonymously on 1800 333 000 or online at crimestopperstas.com.au. The Tasmanian Government has reminded the public there has been no positive local results from coronavirus testing and the state "remains well prepared", in the wake of the Federal Government's implementation of its emergency response plan. In a joint statement, Premier Peter Gutwein and Health Minister Sarah Courtney said they had received an "update" that the Government had "moved ahead of the World Health Organisation and is now effectively operating on the basis that a pandemic had been declared".  "The Prime Minister believes the risk of a global pandemic is very much upon us and as a result the Commonwealth Government has taken steps necessary to prepare for such a pandemic," the statement reads. "The plan includes preparations for extra controls at airports and ports, further quarantine measures and detailing how schools should react to any widespread outbreak." The Tasmanian Government said it "recognises travel restrictions may have an impact on some Tasmanian businesses", and encouraged anyone with any questions to call 1800 440 026 or visit the website. Tasmania's entry into the National Basketball League is expected to be made official today. It is understood league owner Larry Kestelman will hold a press conference this afternoon in Hobart to announce that Tasmania will enter the competition. It will come off the back of a Glenorchy City Council vote that will see the Derwent Entertainment Centre sold to the State Government. The Tasmanian team will play home games out of the revamped arena from next year. The state has not been represented in the national competition since 1996. The Tasmanian Greens have referred two ministers and a public servant to the Integrity Commissioner for alleged misconduct relating to a now-defunct forest protest ban, which threatened those staging demonstrations with fines of up to $500,000 before the ban was withdrawn on Tuesday. Greens leader Cassy O'Connor alleged Resources Minister Guy Barnett, Attorney-General Elise Archer and Mark Cocker from WorkSafe misused their positions, abused power and issued an unlawful prohibition against the Bob Brown Foundation seeking to peacefully protest. "We know this was an overtly political act designed to intimidate peaceful protesters who are standing up for our beautiful forests. We hope that the Integrity Commission recognises that this is an issue of ethics in government," she said. Ms Archer described the action taken by the Greens as disgraceful.  Tasmania's fifth wind farm has started power generation, nudging the state towards its target of using 100 per cent renewable energy by 2022. The $280 million Granville Harbour Wind Farm is expected to produce energy for 46,000 homes.  Resources Minister Guy Barnett said that production would help Tasmania become fully reliant on renewable energy in two years time. "We're on track to get to 100 per cent, fully self-sufficient in renewable energy by 2022 and that's very encouraging indeed" he said. But Goanna Energy's Marc White said the State Government still had to do more to meet the target. "The Granville Harbour wind farm will produce around two per cent of the state's consumption". "The Cattle Hill wind farm will produce about 3 to 4 per cent, so that'll still see us with a little bit of a deficit on the average inflow a year," he said. The state forecast for Friday is for showers and cool conditions in the south-west, clearing showers and cool in the south-east, and mostly cloudy and cool-to-mild in the north.  Saturday: Showers, mild in the south-west. Windy on the highlands. Mostly sunny, warm in the south-east. Mostly sunny, mild-to-warm in the north. Sunday: Showers, mild in the south-west. Mostly cloudy, mild in the south-east. Mostly cloudy, cool-to-mild in the north-west. Late shower, mild in the north-east. Monday: Showers, cool in the south-west. Mostly sunny, mild in the south-east. Mostly sunny, cool-to-mild in the north-west. Clearing shower, cool in the north-east.. A full and updated list of warnings can be found on the Bureau of Meteorology's Tasmanian Warnings summary webpage. Updated information about fires and permits can be found on the Tasmanian Fire Service website. Source: Bureau of Meteorology 
