Qantas enforces new coronavirus precautions on flights, but no social distancing
Qantas has unveiled new measures to prevent the spread of COVID-19 on its flights — but social distancing is not one of them. "Social distancing on an aircraft isn't practical the way it is on the ground," Qantas medical director Dr Ian Hosegood said. "Given the low transmission risk on board, we don't believe it's necessary in order to be safe."It comes a week after Qantas chief executive Alan Joyce told the ABC that his company was seeking an exemption from social-distancing rules with the Federal Government. The airline will roll out its "Fly Well" safety measures from June 12. Pre-flight safetyPassengers will notice some major differences before they board a Qantas or Jetstar plane:Contactless check-in (via the airline's website or app) and self-serve bag drop are "strongly encouraged"There will be hand sanitising stations at the departure gates, and more regular cleaning"Increased physical distancing" at Qantas Lounges (but not on the flight itself)On-board precautionsQantas has also outlined its safety measures, in lieu of social distancing:It will provide masks to all passengers — wearing one is "not mandatory", but is recommended for "everyone's peace-of-mind""Enhanced cleaning" with a focus on seats, seatbelts, overhead lockers, air vents and toiletsOnce passengers are seated, they will be asked to "limit movement" around the cabin. They will also receive sanitising wipes to wipe down seat belts, trays and armrests themselvesThe airline will "encourage" passengers to download the Government's COVIDSafe app and "require" them to follow strict hygiene protocols'Extremely low' riskIn a statement, the airline said its air conditioning would get rid of almost all viruses on board. "The air-conditioning systems of all Qantas and Jetstar aircraft are already fitted with hospital-grade HEPA filters, which remove 99.9 per cent of all particles including viruses."It also said the cabin air was refreshed, on average, every five minutes during the flight. Dr Hosegood said there were a number of reasons why the risk of being infected with coronavirus onboard was "extremely low". "That's due to a combination of factors, including the cabin air filtration system, the fact people don't sit face-to-face and the high backs of aircraft seats acting as a physical barrier."Five-minute window of infectionThe Transport Workers Union said Qantas' new measures were not enough, accusing the airline of "downplaying" the risks. "At least 60 workers across the Qantas Group have been infected with the virus," the TWU said in a statement. "A dossier compiled by TWU safety experts revealed systematic failing in how Qantas dealt with an Adelaide Airport cluster, which saw 34 workers infected and over 750 quarantined.""It's hard for an airline to be profitable if social distancing were enforced," said Professor Raina MacIntyre, a virologist at the University of New South Wales. "But being in an aircraft is a high risk … it's an enclosed space where lots of people congregate for long periods of time. "Also, if a passenger has COVID-19, they may show no symptoms."When asked about Qantas' air-conditioning system, Professor MacIntyre said the use of HEPA filters would help to limit the risk of catching coronavirus. She said the risk of infection also depended on whether Qantas was using "outside" air or "recycled" air — the riskier of the two options. Even refreshing the cabin air every five minutes might not be enough. "Studies of tuberculosis show that if you're sitting a few rows behind or in front of someone, you're at risk," she said. "In the five minutes between air changes, you're still at risk. "I have made a personal decision not to fly unless I'm vaccinated from COVID-19."Across the world, many governments and pharmaceutical companies are spending billions of dollars in a race to develop a coronavirus vaccine, which could be months or years away. Earlier this week, the World Health Organization (WHO) has even warned that COVID-19 may "never go away" and we might have to learn to live with it.
