Greens demand job guarantees and free education for young people in coronavirus recovery plan
Anyone under 30 would be guaranteed a job, a better income or a free place at a university or TAFE, under a new policy position the federal Greens have launched in response to the coronavirus pandemic. Key points:The Greens want the Government to take on billions of debt to rebuild the economyThe party is warning young people are at risk of facing long-term unemploymentThe Government has cautioned future generations would have to pay for its spendingThe crossbench party wants the Federal Government to take on tens of billions of dollars of debt in a bid to rebuild the Australian economy after COVID-19. Leader Adam Bandt accused the Coalition and Labor of having responded to the crisis with austerity measures, rather than billions in new spending to reshape Australia in a post-COVID environment. "Young people have been smashed by the corona crisis," he said. "If we don't offer every young person a job, a study place or a decent income, we risk creating a lost generation."The Federal Government has allocated more than $230 billion to coronavirus-stimulus measures, including a $130 billion six-month wage subsidy for six million workers. The Government has also doubled the JobSeeker payment, previously called Newstart. Labor has backed both measures but wants the JobKeeper program to be extended to include more casual workers, with leader Anthony Albanese urging the Government to channel Australia's former wartime prime ministers to reshape the Australian economy. He wants the Government to build high-speed rail, decentralise services and revitalise the nation's manufacturing sector. But the Greens want the Coalition to go even further. "If we don't, the cost will be very, very high," Mr Bandt told the ABC. "We learnt from the global financial crisis that for young people who are starting their working lives at a time of recession, they carry the scars with them for life unless they're given the opportunity of good, decent work with decent security working on meaningful projects. "We owe this to young people because otherwise we'll be stuck paying for income support for a very long time for what could be a lost generation."Dubbed Invest To Recover, the Greens' plan seeks to create almost 900,000 jobs building renewable energy infrastructure in the public and private sectors. It also seeks to spend $60 billion to revive domestic manufacturing and processing. The arts would receive billions, to support a sector that has missed out on the JobKeeper $1,500-a-fortnight payment. The Greens want a $2.3 billion entertainment and creative industries fund to put artists into every school and library in Australia. The fund would also pay for festivals, films and live performances. The Government has repeatedly said the doubling of the JobSeeker payment, to $1,100 a fortnight, was only a temporary measure. Mr Bandt said the Greens would use their Senate crossbench numbers to fight any effort to return the payment to $550 a fortnight. Labor has also indicated it would fight any effort to return JobSeeker to its previous rate. Mr Bandt said it was incumbent upon the Government to act as a "safety-net employer", in guaranteeing work to people until the private sector rehired the 1 million people who have lost their jobs due to coronavirus. The Greens' call for a debt-laden approach to Government spending is all but certain to be rejected by the Coalition. Conservative commentators and some within the Government's backbench are already pushing for the Coalition to use a pre-planned June review of JobKeeper to cut back the program. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg has given no indication that was likely, but has warned about the economic toll additional spending would have on future generations. "Australians know there is no money tree," he told the Parliament last week. "What we borrow today, we must repay in the future. "Temporary and targeted, the new spending measures were not designed to go forever but to build a bridge to the recovery phase."
