The coronavirus pandemic will change the way we work, with women to reap many of the benefits
For Cynthia Calderon, working from home won't end when the COVID-19 pandemic does. She set up a home office a year ago to spend more time with her son on Fridays when he wasn't at school. Far from getting in the way of her career goals, she was given a promotion. "It was reassurance that if you work and you deliver, then it doesn't matter if you are in the office or at home, you get what you deserve," she said. Ms Calderon works in corporate affairs at engineering and construction company Clough and said more of the firm's staff would take up flexible work after trying it out during the pandemic. Her husband Ricardo Herrera, an engineer at Rio Tinto, has been working from home for the first time and believed the flexibility would stick in his workplace too. Childcare a shared responsibilityThe couple said this would help them share the load at home, which was something they were already working on. When their baby arrives in July, Ms Calderon said she would take the first six months of parental leave before heading back to work and handing over care duties to her husband for at least three months. "Cynthia is a high achiever and I did not want to stop her from work," Mr Herrera said. "I'm a bit scared to be honest, but I think this is a once in a lifetime opportunity to create a bond [with the newborn]."Rigid workplace structures have traditionally been a major barrier for women who, like Ms Calderon, don't want to give up their career due to caring responsibilities. But that has started to change in recent years and some believe an accelerated shift to workplace flexibility could be a silver lining to come out of a pandemic that has disproportionately affected female workers. The 2019 KPMG report She's Price(d)less identified key drivers behind Australia's gender pay gap and opportunities to effect change. Some of these have advanced during the pandemic, including improving work-life balance, increasing the availability of flexible work and increasing the availability of childcare or decreasing its cost. Benefits of working from homeWestern Australia has the nation's biggest gender pay gap at 22 per cent, and Tania Cecconi from CEOs for Gender Equity wanted employers to seize some of the opportunities. "One of the biggest benefits [of the pandemic] has been this huge shift to working from home, which has demanded flexibility for the first time in many organisations that have never delivered it," she said. "Roles that demand a lot of travel or are very inflexible typically lock out women with caring responsibilities. This time has demonstrated that in fact we don't need to have as much travel. "We cannot waste a crisis and I think one of the best learnings is that there are gains to be made and progressive organisations are already looking at the gains."Overall, the coronavirus pandemic has disproportionately hit female workers, with some dubbing it a "she-cession" amid fears it would reverse gains made toward workplace equality. Labour force economist Conrad Liveris said ABS data showed 58 per cent of jobs lost in WA since February belonged to women. He said this was primarily because women were more likely to be employed in part-time roles and female-dominated industries had been the hardest hit. While the most recent payroll data had shown a much steeper decline in men's wages, Mr Liveris said this was likely due to the Federal Government's JobKeeper payments kicking in. Gender pay gap forecast to widenIn WA's mining industry, for example, wages were down 30.8 per cent between March 14 and May 2. "We are likely to see an increased gender pay gap in Western Australia and across the country," Mr Liveris said. "With JobKeeper and decreased male wages we might see it even out a little bit. But over a two-year period, we will see an increase."But he said it wasn't all bad news. "I don't think we can say it is overall a completely negative picture for gender equality, there are some opportunities there," he said. "When we start looking at flexible working and maintaining the childcare sector, those are real opportunities to support women back into the workforce longer term. "Flexible work and working from home were already increasing but now we have an evidence base that all of the things we thought could work, actually can. "I think we will see more men spending more time on care and at home and women working a fair bit more."Childcare 'key to equality'University of Melbourne sociology Professor Lyn Craig said improving workplace flexibility would mainly benefit white-collar workers. "[Working from home] is a thing that happens at the higher echelons and women are disproportionately not [seen] at the higher echelons," she said. "Women are in high contact jobs that are not able to be done apart from in person."She said other opportunities to improve equality had been highlighted during the pandemic, but they would require government investment. She said childcare should stay free, wages should be increased in female-dominated industries such as healthcare, childcare and education that had proven vital, and economic stimulus should be spent in those sectors. "We often think of stimulus as infrastructure — roads and bridges — and that this is what makes the economy work and is nation-building," she said. "But in an economy that is heavily service-oriented, essential infrastructure includes things like childcare, because it makes it possible for those jobs to happen. "With great times of crisis comes great opportunity so it is possible that this will turn out to be a turning point, but it will depend on the opportunities being seized."Professor Craig said the free childcare initiative introduced during the pandemic, which was likely to end soon, was the most obvious way to improve equality. "It is uneconomic for most women to put their children into childcare for more than three days a week, so most of them don't," she said. Public sector reform mootedIn March, the WA Government launched a 10-year plan to address gender inequality, which included a target of 50 per cent women in top-level public service positions. Women's Interests Minister Simone McGurk said the state had struggled with a gender equity problem for many years. "We have had the highest gender pay gap in the country for a number of decades now and we need to do better," she said. "It is something we are committed to [improving] and we are calling on industry to be aware of these challenges as they rebuild post-COVID-19. "There are a lot of opportunities [out of the pandemic]. For instance, the ability for people to work from home, to work different hours, to have more flexible practices. "Some of our private sector are leading the way in that. In the public sector we need to get better at that."
