'Justice hasn't changed, just the mode of delivery': How Victorian courts are adapting to coronavirus
Fuzzy pictures, distorted sounds, internet signals that freeze or drop out — we're all experiencing problems with videoconferencing in our lives. Key points:Victorian courts have had to change how they run because of the coronavirus pandemicThe courts are using more videoconferencing for remote hearingsDespite delays in some cases, senior judges say the arrangements are ensuring justice is done in VictoriaBut for Victoria's Chief Magistrate, Lisa Hannan, the COVID-19 pandemic has added complications — how to juggle 145 magistrates over 51 jurisdictions across the state, as well as the needs of thousands of lawyers and defendants. "There are occasional technical glitches," Chief Magistrate Hannan said. "But this is a learning exercise amongst other things."At the Melbourne Magistrates' Court, the number of videolink hearings has doubled to a recent peak of 244 a day, as a result of the pandemic. "We have transformed what has been largely a paper-based court to a court that is now hearing Webex hearings," Chief Magistrate Hannan said, referring to the online meeting software. Chief Magistrate Lisa Hannan told the ABC every change to the system had been carefully considered. Before the pandemic took hold, 2,000 people went in and out of the Magistrates' Court in Melbourne every day. Now, traffic is about a tenth of that. On any given day, only half of the rostered magistrates are working at the courts, with the rest working from home. Only the most urgent cases are being heard — such as bail applications and plea hearings, as well as cases involving those in custody, or people making family violence applications. Some lawyers and some prisoners or remandees are still attending court, but only if physical distancing can be achieved. Courts face tech constraints and deliver email judgmentsThe Criminal Bar Association of Victoria's vice-chair, Sally Flynn QC, said there had been problems with the number of links available and time restrictions that applied to videoconferencing. "Certainly it's difficult when you don't have ready access to your client, for example if we're dealing over videolink, or an instructing solicitor," Ms Flynn said. Victorian Legal Aid's director of criminal law, Dan Nicholson, said that was especially so for the most vulnerable clients in the system. "[For] our clients who have disabilities or require interpreters, it can be harder for them to participate in their hearings when they are done remotely," he said. While lawyers agree the system under COVID-19 as it stands is not perfect, some say the courts needed to change before the pandemic struck. Mr Nicholson said there were opportunities for a better system overall if the courts could improve the technology and the processes used. "Unfortunately the experience of a lot of people at court on the day is paper-based chaos really," he said. Across the varying court jurisdictions there's been a rapid and radical shift since the pandemic began, as large sections of the work of the courts has moved online. The biggest change is that jury trials have been suspended because of the risks of having groups of people together for extended periods of time. Emergency legislation allows judge-only trials but defendants have to consent to a judge-only hearing. As yet, the ABC understands that no applications have been received in any Victorian court. The Court of Appeal has continued to operate as usual, while commercial and civil matters in the Supreme Court are also proceeding. There are few, if any, people in court. The Supreme Court is upgrading its technological capabilities to host more web-based hearings, allocating staff to help set up virtual hearings. Some rulings are even being made via email. Finding a way to keep the courts running"Shutting the doors was not an option," the Supreme Court's Chief Justice Anne Ferguson told lawyers in a recent webinar hosted by the Victorian Bar Association. "[The change] has shown us we didn't need to be afraid," she said. "There's a real upside, an opportunity to drop the barriers to look at different ways to do things because we've had to."Traditionally, the industry has been heavily dependent on in-person meetings — whether it's an initial briefing with a client, or court hearings. For those who are in custody, court restrictions are being exacerbated by a prison ban on visitors, which means lawyers have to rely on telephone and video links too. Ms Flynn, from the Criminal Bar Association, said it was important lawyers could communicate with their clients. "It's imperative that we have access to clients to be able to get instructions to effectively act for clients in court and properly represent them," she said. Matters are also being adjourned until much later in the year, in the hope hearings can return to some kind of normalcy at some point. Delays prompt a rise in bail applicationsFor Ms Flynn, the delays are concerning. "Justice delayed is always justice denied and it is important that we try to minimise those delays as much as possible," she said. Chief Magistrate Hannan admits there will be a backlog. "Justice may be delayed in some cases but we will work very hard to ensure those cases are heard as soon as possible," she said. The delays have prompted a spike in the number of bail applications, as lawyers argue the restrictions within prisons on visitors and inmate programs because of the coronavirus pandemic are denying their clients timely justice. Earlier this month, inmate Mark Rowson's lawyers argued he should be released because he was at risk of dying if a coronavirus outbreak occurred in the prison. The system under COVID-19 restrictions also disadvantages those who want to represent themselves, because they are not linked in to the court's communications system and they are currently unable to access public libraries and public legal resources. There are also concerns about what happens to clients who can't meet bail or Community Corrections Order conditions, because of disruptions to alcohol, drug and other court-mandated services. Is the new system fair enough?Some lawyers are worried the many changes made to court practices during the pandemic could lead to an uptick in challenges and appeals. But Chief Magistrate Hannan rejects the idea that changes have been made too quickly. "I don't accept that anything's been done on the fly," she said. "We have considered each and every change that we have made. "The practice directions have been considered in terms of their impacts upon all stakeholders. "Justice hasn't changed, just the mode of delivery."County Court Chief Judge Peter Kidd told ABC radio last week that the courts were working in a compromised environment, but said the system was delivering justice. "It's not a perfect environment, it's not business as usual," he said"But is it more than satisfactory so that justice is done? The answer is yes."
