Coronavirus study to track the experiences of expectant mums during global pandemic
Brisbane woman Amy Buchanan had little idea what to expect from her first pregnancy — let alone one in the midst of a global health emergency. Key points:Expectant mum Amy Buchanan was told she might have to give birth to her first child on her ownThe global study will survey 10,000 women and partners about the care they received before and after their birth amid COVID-19Many women have reported feeling anxious, isolated and alone while pregnant during the pandemicThe 31-year-old's first child is due in a fortnight and the wait for its arrival has been anxious. Prior to coronavirus restrictions being lifted, Ms Buchanan was faced with the prospect of having to give birth to her first child alone — without her husband, family, trusted medical team or support network. "It would have been terrifying," she said. "We don't know what to expect, so it isn't just navigating pregnancy for the first time but navigating it during a health crisis. "We were unable to do birthing classes at the hospital, or to do group education sessions or hospital visits — all of that stuff was cancelled. "So not only are you potentially birthing by yourself but you also don't get the education in the lead-up to it."Complicating matters further, Ms Buchanan and her husband are also both frontline workers at the Caboolture Hospital, where coronavirus positive patients have been admitted. "It's such a new virus, we don't know whether I could contract it and pass it on to the baby via vertical transmission or what that would mean," she said. Global study to track pandemic pregnanciesAn Australian research centre is leading a new global study into how maternity services, pregnant women and new mothers have been impacted by the outbreak of coronavirus. The Stillbirth Centre of Research Excellence said the project hoped to survey 10,000 new mums and pregnant women, and their partners. Principal investigator Vicki Flenady said researchers would focus on the use of telehealth appointments, the psychological impacts of social isolation, and the support offered to families. "There's a concern with the move to telehealth for routine antenatal care [before and after birth] that we might be missing important opportunities to keep mothers and babies safe," Professor Flenady said. "We want to hear about these experiences from women to ensure we are giving them the best care. "Most hospitals have stopped running large antenatal clinics and [are] only seeing those women at more increased risk, so there's a concern that some women may be falling through the cracks. "We got some real anecdotal evidence from women saying how anxious they are about the change in the care, the feeling of isolation and being alone during this time."Professor Flenady said the results of the survey would be used to improve current and future maternity services for pregnant couples in a health crisis. Several countries were already onboard with the project including the United Kingdom, Ireland, Spain, Italy, Germany, France, Canada, India and Laos. 'Stronger mothers for this'Mary Thomas and her husband Bo welcomed their daughter Polly on May 9 and the new parents said while there were moments of nervousness leading up to the birth there were positives to being in lockdown. "I actually like that it's lockdown — I loved having just Bo and I during labour and not having visitors, so it was optimal bonding time for babe and I," she said. "I still feel really supported but also not overwhelmed as I couldn't imagine having visitors over every single day."In the weeks before giving birth, Ms Thomas said she had an epiphany about having a baby during a global pandemic. "As a mama-to-be, struggling to find that sense of calm as [I was] about to give birth during these uncertain and fearful times — I had an epiphany that changed my perspective around this entire situation," she said. "As I was packing my hospital bag, I started to cry, about to reach for my phone and call my husband for reassurance [but] something stopped me. "It was the figures of strong women in my family who birthed before me."She said it was time "to remember the lineage of strong women before you and where you came from". "Harness that collective power within and bring that with you when you birth your beautiful baby into this world," she said. "What will our babies' generation bring? The babies that were born during a pandemic? They're a force to be reckoned with. "They're the game changers, the leaders, the creators, the peacemakers — we will all be stronger women, stronger mothers for this."Virus impacts services, behaviours of pregnant womenProfessor Flenady said the question of how best to care for women and families during a pandemic was one being considered by health professionals around the world. "We'll be able to compare the experiences that women are having during this time against the different policies that are in place across countries," she said. "We hope to learn a lot from that in terms of what's acceptable and what sort of step we need to put in place to support women at this time."Professor Flenady said while current evidence indicated pregnant women were not more severely affected by COVID-19 than the general population, the pandemic was affecting the delivery of antenatal services and the behaviours of pregnant women. "There's no evidence to indicate that pregnant women are more susceptible to COVID-19 or that their babies are at any particular increased risk," she said. "However, the worrying consequence of the outbreak is that women are maybe reluctant to seek medical attention when they need it. "Such as when they experience warning signs of decreased foetal movement and this may put them at increased risk of stillbirth. "We know that stillbirth is not a rare occurrence, six families a day endure that heartache of a stillborn baby, so we want to understand women's concerns more."
