Racist attack in Launceston and other coronavirus taunts prompt plea for calm
Three people claim to have been the target of a racially motivated attack early this week as they walked to the public toilets near a supermarket in Launceston. They said items were thrown at them, they were called "Corona", and a phone was hit from one of their hands as they tried to record what was happening.  Late Wednesday night, authorities confirmed no new cases of coronavirus had been diagnosed, with the state's total remaining at 226. Sarah Bolt, the state's anti-discrimination commissioner, said she had heard of other targeted racial incidents in relation to coronavirus.  "There has been a stark increase in the number of reports and inquiries in relation to discrimination on the basis of race, and the recipients of those tirades have been predominantly people from Asia or who are of Asian appearance," she said.  "And again, most of them have all related to COVID-19." This type of targeted racial abuse was condemned by police in Hobart in March, when a Hong Kong student was taunted and punched for wearing a medical face mask at a local supermarket. The student was with a friend in the New Town Plaza car park when a man shouted "you've got the virus" and "go back to your country". Ms Bolt said racially fuelled attacks created fear and anxiety for those on the receiving end. "I've spoken to members of the Chinese community who talked about people being frightened to go to the shops or to go about their daily business in fear of being attacked verbally, and even physically, and particularly being blamed for the coronavirus pandemic," she said. "So that sort of has limitations on how they can just enjoy their everyday life, and people tend to forget that many of the people who are of Asian appearance in Tasmania have been here for multi generations." While physical abuse is a matter for police investigation, verbal discrimination based on race can be referred to Equal Opportunity Tasmania for further action.  Elise Archer, the Minister for Justice and Corrections, said penalties could be enforced.  "That type of behaviour is deeply concerning to us as a Government, it's deeply concerning to me as the Attorney-General," she said.  "I have encouraged anyone that has experienced that sort of attack, that's racially motivated, to contact Equal Opportunity Tasmania, where the anti-discrimination commissioner can take on such a complaint." 
