Coronavirus restrictions are slowly easing, so when will your gym, cinemas, cafes and campgrounds reopen?
Parts of Australia are slowly beginning to wake up after a coronavirus-induced hibernation, with businesses and activities gradually returning to normal. But that doesn't mean flipping a switch and things going back to the way they were before. The Prime Minister recently announced a three-step framework, detailing how certain industries can start reopening to the public.  But it's up to each state and territory to decide how and when they roll back their restrictions, and which businesses will be allowed to do what. It's also up to each state and territory government whether restrictions return if COVID-19 cases start to rise again. Here's what we know so far about some common activities. Step one of the national three-step frame work doesn't permit any indoor physical activity, including at gyms.  But it does allow up to 10 people to participate in outdoor sport, and some gyms and boot camps have taken advantage of that by offering limited outdoor classes if their location allows. Some states are keener than others to start working off all that extra Uber Eats. Gyms are open in the Northern Territory, but you shouldn't be there for more than two hours (props to you if you're working out longer than that). In Western Australia, up to 20 people can now participate in indoor and outdoor fitness classes as long as there's no shared equipment. Indoor gyms are still closed in New South Wales and Victoria — NSW says outdoor exercise equipment can be used "with caution", while Victoria says don't touch it. Up to 10 people are allowed to join outdoor gyms or bootcamps in Tasmania, the ACT and Queensland.  South Australia has a 10-person limit for outdoor non-contact sports at the moment, and gyms are flagged to reopen on June 8. Step three of the national framework says venues can welcome up to 100 people at a time, so lots of owners are in the process of working out how they're going to implement those limits. One condition of gyms reopening to up to 20 people at a time is that they must adhere to the four square metre rule (so some smaller gyms may have to limit their attendees to even less than 20). Every gym has their own COVID-19 plan, so contact your facility to see how they're implementing it and the conditions of their reopening before you go.  No cinemas yet — but in some places, they're not far off.  The national framework says indoor movie theatres can open for up to 20 people in step two and up to 100 people in step three. Queensland is adopting this part of the plan for stage two of their roadmap, which is expected to begin on June 12, as has South Australia, where cinemas and theatres are to reopen on June 8. Cinemas are set to reopen in the Northern Territory on June 5, and Western Australia has also flagged reopening cinemas with gathering limits as part of their third phase of easing restrictions, which we should hear more about in the next few weeks. There's not a lot of detail available at the moment about what distances people would have to sit apart when cinemas do reopen. Cinemas and theatres in New South Wales are still closed for now, as they are in the ACT, Tasmania and Victoria (but Tasmania has flagged reopening cinemas to up to 20 people from June 15). For now, stick to Netflix (and iView!).  In most states and territories, you can — but the process might be a little different to what we're used to. Up to 20 patrons can sit in cafes and restaurants in Western Australia, but Queensland, Tasmania, the ACT and New South Wales venues are limited to 10 customers at a time for now. Outdoor dining in small groups has resumed in South Australia, as long as everyone is appropriately distanced. Table service is still not allowed in Victoria, but you can get takeaway. Restaurants, cafes, food courts and sports or RSL clubs are open again in the Northern Territory, but as with gyms, they have a two-hour time limit. Some restaurants and cafes require people to have downloaded the COVIDSafe app or to provide their contact details before they can dine at the venue for contact tracing purposes, and because of customer limits, pre-bookings are recommended. Sorry party animals — nightclubs aren't at the top of the list to reopen first in most places. The NT is ready to party though, they're reopening nightclubs, concert halls, dance halls and bars on June 5. Queensland has listed nightclubs as one of the venues that can have up to 100 people from July 10, but that's subject to further planning. Nightclubs have also been listed as a "future step for consideration" in South Australia, but there's no date on that for now. The national framework recommends nightclubs don't open until the third stage of the three-step plan — but when they do, they can have up to 100 people. It also recommends that places like brothels and strip clubs stay closed until further notice. Not in Victoria, there's still a ban on camping in national parks there. Camping in a state park or campground is still prohibited in Tasmania too, but is flagged in their second stage of easing restrictions that starts on June 15, and campgrounds in the ACT are also closed. Campgrounds and caravan parks remain closed in NSW, unless you work or permanently live there.  Queenslanders are only allowed to go on day trips at the moment, but from June 12 camping in national and state parks will be back on, and people can travel up to 250km from home to do it. But in South Australia, regional travel is allowed again and campgrounds and caravan parks are allowed to reopen, again with all the necessary social distancing.  Camping is also permitted in Western Australia in accordance with travel restrictions — there are still some intrastate borders in place in WA, and campers must observe the 10-person gathering limit. Similarly in the Northern Territory, you can camp but you can't enter restricted biosecurity zones, so it's best to check what parks are open and the activities you can do there before you go. Organised training is allowed for sports teams in the Northern Territory, and playing team sports is expected to be allowed from June 5. In Western Australia you can play non-contact sport with up to 20 people (some contact sport is expected return in their next phase).  Right now in Queensland up to 10 people can play non-contact sport outdoors, but from June 12, up to 20 people can gather for "non-contact indoor and outdoor community sport".  Outdoor sports training is allowed in South Australia for up to 10 people, and competitive sport is flagged to resume from June 8, including indoor sport.  The ACT is allowing up to 10 people to participate in social sport, as long as it's non-contact and outdoors, and up to 10 people can do non-contact training in Tasmania too. In Victoria, sport can resume if it's outside, non-competitive, everyone stays at least 1.5 metres apart and there's no more than ten people in a group — so if you can't modify your sport so there's no contact, it's not allowed. New South Wales also says people must stay 1.5 metres apart outdoors, and no more than 10 people can gather.  Depends how long your list of loved ones is. Restrictions limiting attendance at weddings and funerals have been particularly tough, but these are slowly starting to relax in most states and territories.  The Northern Territory doesn't specify a limit on outdoor weddings, and in Queensland the current 10-person limit is set to increase to 20 from June 12 and up to 100 from July 10. Western Australian weddings can have up to 20 people inside or 30 people outside. Ten guests can also attend a wedding in New South Wales right now, not including the couple, celebrant and photographer. Victoria has a similar rule — 10 guests plus the couple and celebrant — same in Tasmania. The ACT also has a 10-person rule for weddings — there, it includes the couple, but doesn't include the celebrant and photographer. South Australia also includes the couple in their 10-person limit, but not a celebrant or "necessary staff".  There's various social distancing and hygiene conditions to holding weddings no matter where you are, so check with your venue first. If you have guests who are interstate, don't forget some states and territories still have strict border restrictions in place. Guests may be forced to quarantine after crossing the border, or if they don't have the appropriate exemptions they may not be allowed to cross at all.  Or basketball practice, or swimming lessons, or orchestra… It all depends where they do their extracurricular activities, and how many people are in the group. In Queensland, for example, from June 12, up to 20 people will be allowed at pools, community sports clubs, theatres, auditoriums, health clubs and yoga studios. The Northern Territory has already opened studios again for dance classes and organised training for sports teams is back on too. Outdoor sports training can go ahead in South Australia in small groups, and community halls and clubrooms can open, but they have to keep any indoor sporting facilities closed. But in New South Wales dance halls are still closed, as are all indoor recreation facilities and indoor public pools. The ACT allows small groups to play and train for social sport and for swimming lessons to take place, but all indoor and outdoor gatherings can have a maximum of 10 people including children. In Victoria, small group lessons at places like community centres "cannot resume at this time" and contact sport is off the table — but from Monday, new protocols will allow for some gathering-limited, socially distanced AFL and netball training to resume. Tasmania says any indoor venue used for sport and recreation can't open or operate, including those used for dance, cheer and gymnastics, but non-contact sports training is allowed in groups of 10. In Western Australia up to 20 people can partake in fitness and non-contact sports, swim in public pools or gather at community facilities. Overseas travel still isn't on the cards to be resuming anytime soon. We've heard estimates about overseas travel not returning before 2021, and even that air travel might not fully go back to normal until 2023. But for now, all overseas travel is currently banned and exceptions to the rule are few and far between. There's a chance we could be able to visit New Zealand before international borders completely reopen, but there's no guarantees on that right now.  That dream overseas holiday will have to wait a little while longer. Every state and territory is rolling back their restrictions differently. Within that, each business is coming up with their own plans to meet requirements based on their particular location, facilities, staff and style of operation. National Cabinet is reviewing the progress of easing restrictions regularly, as are state and territory governments, so there is a chance that restrictions could remain in place or even be brought back if safety is at risk. If you're not sure about something, check your state or territory government's website or contact the business directly to ask how they're doing things. 
