Donald Trump replaces Mick Mulvaney as White House chief of staff, taps Mark Meadows
US President Donald Trump has parted ways with acting White House chief of staff Mick Mulvaney and replaced him with conservative congressman and close ally Mark Meadows. Mr Meadows takes over as the White House deals with the unfolding coronavirus crisis and as Mr Trump prepares for a re-election contest in November. He becomes the fourth chief of staff in Mr Trump's three years in office, tasked with attempting to bring order to a chaotic presidency. Mr Meadows is a member of the US House of Representatives from North Carolina and was a combative defender of the President during the impeachment saga, so much so that Mr Trump singled him out for praise after the Republican-led Senate acquitted the President. "He's a tremendously talented man, not just as a politician. As a human being, he's incredible," Mr Trump said at the time. Mr Trump named Mr Mulvaney to be his special US envoy to Northern Ireland amid preparations to welcome Irish Prime Minister Leo Varadkar to Washington for St Patrick's Day ceremonies later this month. A former senior administration official said the change had been a long time in the works and was a "done deal" some time ago. Mr Trump announced the move just after arriving at his Mar-a-Lago Club in Palm Beach, Florida, where he is spending the weekend. Mr Trump had long groused about Mr Mulvaney, who angered the President last year by saying at a White House news conference that Mr Trump had sought to persuade Ukraine to investigate Democratic rival Joe Biden by withholding US aid to Ukraine. What Mr Mulvaney said ran counter to Mr Trump's argument — that there was no "quid pro quo" with Ukraine. Mr Mulvaney quickly walked back the statement, but the damage was done. Mr Mulvaney, a conservative former South Carolina politician, did last more than a year as acting chief of staff after replacing retired General John Kelly, who had succeeded Reince Priebus in the job. He was named acting chief of staff in December 2018 and Mr Trump never made the appointment permanent. A source familiar with the situation said both Mr Mulvaney and Mr Meadows flew aboard Air Force One with Mr Trump to North Carolina on Monday and there was little warmth between the two men. There's no shame in being confused by the system. Plenty of Americans are, too. Mr Trump did not speak to Mr Mulvaney, the source said. Mr Meadows announced in December he would not run for re-election this year. "This was the most orchestrated personnel change so far. Since the Northern Ireland deal was announced at the same time, this was clearly a mutual decision," Sean Spicer, Mr Trump's former White House press secretary, said. Mr Spicer said Mr Meadows had a clear understanding of Mr Trump's style and agenda. ABC/Reuters 
