Being a paramedic during the coronavirus crisis — when disappearing isn't an option
To survive in the unpredictable world of stabbings, shootings, road accidents and drug and alcohol violence, paramedics develop a nose for danger. Our instinct and priority is to shield ourselves from it first. Running into a burning building might seem heroic, but you can't help a soul when you're dead. When I picked up my first suspected case of COVID-19 four weeks ago, I felt like the canary in the coalmine. Our patient was in his late 60s, a former sailor with a missing leg. We knew it was serious. Sailors don't often call ambulances — especially Moby Dick kind of sailors — unless they're really dying. What's a mere flu after wrestling whales? After hearing his coughing and spluttering from the door, we returned to the ambulance and put on our personal protective equipment (PPE). It felt like a pivotal moment — one I wasn't too comfortable with. It made me think of my escape plan. Back in 2003, I'd done a training course for chemical, biological and radioactive emergencies. Learning about the effects of nerve agents on the human body was alarming. Stuck in my head to this day is the mnemonic SLUDGE: salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, gastric emptying, emesis — basically, leaking from every orifice. It's no wonder my classmates and I had second thoughts. We decided to keep Aloha shirts, emblazoned with palm trees and sunsets, in our ambulances just in case an incident like this actually happened. Then, we could put them on and walk away from the ambulance, disappear into the crowd — vanish for our own survival. It's wasn't cowardly, just sensible. Remember DR ABC from your first aid course? Danger — remove the danger, or yourself from danger. The night we picked up the sailor, I thought of my Aloha shirt, and wondered if this was the moment to put it on. For a second the idea made me smile, but of course it was a fantasy. Running away was never a serious option.  Radio National Fictions is the ABC's place for creative audio fiction. We deal in the hilarious, the gritty and sometimes the dystopian. Think of it as movies for your ears. Instead I would do what most paramedics were doing: curse quietly, protect myself as best I could, then go join the battle. A month on, emergencies like car accidents and sporting injuries are down, because people are cocooned in isolation. We respond along empty highways reclaimed by insects. When we arrive at a house with a suspected COVID-19 case, we don our masks and gloves, goggles and gowns. It takes time. The curtains of neighbouring houses twitch. Fearful eyes stare down. But we can't rush our work. There's a system we follow: the order of PPE application and removal, how we dispose of face-shields and garments, the meticulous cleaning of ourselves and our vehicles. But no matter the care we take or how disciplined we are with wiping down, some people out there see us as lepers.  At the height of the coronavirus outbreak, we followed the city's paramedics into the homes of the sick and dying. No wonder our usual workload of anxious people has dropped. To many we are now the ones they fear the most, thinking we carry the virus. They give us the widest berth in the mall and cross the street to avoid us. Last week, a customer at a supermarket called a paramedic friend of mine a "spreader". When my work partner says she's hungry and wants to stop by Woollies in the ambulance I offer to go in for her. "I have my shirt," I tell her. "My Aloha shirt." But she's not convinced. "Who wears Hawaiian shirts over blue uniform trousers with reflective stripes?" she replies, shaking her head. "No point going undercover unless you do it right." My initial anxieties have begun to settle. The Australian coronavirus disaster hasn't materialised, at least not so far. I heard a man outside my coffee shop call it a "fizzer". The sailor we picked up on our first night tested negative, as have most of those I've treated. So far only one paramedic in the country has been infected. We've played our cards right and we're winning the game — though it won't take much for things to go south if we get cocky about it. After work I take my uniform off at the ambulance station and leave my boots in my locker. My wife doesn't like me hugging the children or touching anything at all without a shower. Even then, when I try and kiss her on the lips she turns her head and gives me her cheek. "Sorry! Corona!" she says, cheerfully as she can. It could just be an excuse to avoid my kisses, but if it's fear, I understand. Just as I'm protecting myself from patients, she's protecting herself from me. D for danger, I know.  Maybe it will end up being the lack of kisses, rather than coronavirus, that compels me to put on my Aloha shirt and walk into the sunset. Benjamin Gilmour is a paramedic and author. His most recent book is The Gap. Get more stories that go beyond the news cycle with our weekly newsletter. 
