Queensland roadside campers use vines, sticks and rope to quarantine during coronavirus pandemic
While the country faces its most serious health crisis in living memory, 62-year-old Steve Johnstone uses a thin piece of rope around a dusty ute to quarantine himself. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Each morning he washes in the ocean, sits down with a first aid kit and checks his temperature to reassure himself he does not have coronavirus.  "We have nowhere else to go," Mr Johnstone said.  The Far North Queensland man is one of about 15 people living in cars and tents at a campsite between Ellis Beach and the Captain Cook Highway, 30 kilometres north of Cairns. With most other campgrounds and caravan parks in the region closed due to COVID-19, the spot has become a temporary haven for pensioners, homeless people and backpackers during the pandemic.  Dead branches and tree vines have been used to section off sites so the occupants can comply with social distancing rules, in the hope they will not be forced to move on.  "I don't have a home to quarantine so I've made this my home until I can find accommodation," Mr Johnstone said.  Unemployed and living off a disability pension, Mr Johnstone said he could not afford accommodation options offered to him by the Queensland Housing Department and other homeless support services in the area.  "The only other place I can probably go to is a deserted house and squat in it, which I don't want to do.  With no toilets or showers at the campsite he was also concerned about the health and safety of occupants but said this was his lifestyle until the pandemic passed. "I'm pretty sure they can open up some caravan parks or the Cairns Showgrounds for people like us. "It's not really possible for us to quarantine if people are coming and going.  "If you get corona your cards are definitely up, especially when you're my age." But others at the site said they had chosen to settle there and believed it was the safest option during the pandemic.  German backpacker Jannik Zintarra has been camping at the site for two weeks.  "At the beginning we were in a hostel, but there were way too many people for us so we decided to go to a camp ground.  "So many [other campgrounds] are closed so we ended up here.  "We could do Airbnb but that's very expensive and we're trying to save money because we just can't find a job at the moment."  Mr Zintarra said they were trying to help each other out, making trips to the nearest town to buy food and essential items for elderly campers.  Members of the Ellis Beach and Buchans Point community have raised concerns about the campground with Queensland Police Service (QPS) and the Transport Department.   A police spokesperson said officers were aware of the situation, but some of the campers had nowhere else to go.  "We won't be taking any action against them especially in the current climate," the spokesperson said.  "They're doing really a pretty good job with what they've got.  "Whilst they're there and doing the right thing, at least we know they're not moving around and spreading the virus."  The Cairns Regional Council said it had received 29 complaints relating to illegal camping in the past three weeks and 11 resulted in move-on requests.  "Council is taking an educational and flexible approach to those people, such as grey nomads and travelling backpackers, who may have found themselves without a place to stay as a result of coronavirus restrictions," a spokesman said.  The Queensland Transport Department said it was working closely with the QPS and Cairns Regional Council to determine the best approach to managing camping in roadside areas. A spokesperson said the situation at Ellis Beach would be monitored and enforcement action would be carried out if necessary.  On March 26, the Queensland Government announced $24.7 million to help specialist homelessness services provide immediate housing support to vulnerable residents during the COVID-19 crisis, but the amount distributed in Far North Queensland was unclear.   The ABC has contacted homelessness services including Mission Australia and Anglicare but has not received a response.  
