Wheatbelt businesses benefit from regional COVID-19 travel restrictions as more people buy local
Despite restrictions on local businesses and COVID-19 travel restrictions, some Wheatbelt businesses are stronger than before because of local support. In Northam, about 100 kilometres east of Perth, many businesses did better during the strictest period of Western Australia's regional border closures, according to Northam Chamber of Commerce CEO, Esther Bliss. "There's been a lot of businesses in town that have done very well because people aren't going down the hill and have been able to buy local," she said. "Something we have been screaming at them [about] for years, the businesses have seen a great number of people who have never been in their stores before, coming in." Avon Valley Contractors is a stock feed, garden and bike shop that has been operating in Northam for four years. Owner Enrika Grogan said April was their best month of business ever. "April was up 22 per cent so that would be a massive profit margin for us — that is huge," she said. "Normally 6 to 7 per cent — that's kind of where you're tracking." The business diversified into a bike shop by chance last year and Ms Grogan said they had been so busy they had to employ another staff member in the midst of the pandemic. "We've kind of been continually adding to the business because when you're in a country town or community you kind of have to be ready to pivot very easily, you can't stay doing the same thing," she said. "Everyone in town is feeling that and anyone that maybe would have lost business to Perth has gained people who may have travelled down the hill." At Lucy's Cafe on the main street of Northam, owner Jess Joy said when COVID-19 restrictions were first introduced, they had to diversify their business by making ready-to-go meals. She said their loyal customer base meant they were able to survive. "Our customers have been amazing," Ms Joy said. "We might usually have someone get their own lunch but they've encouraged their workplace to get lunch and things like that, so the community has been awesome." Ms Bliss said the pandemic had been a learning curve for regional businesses. "You cannot just rely on things as they always had been, because we are in a time where this has never happened before," she said. "So the lesson learnt is to always continuously be improving your business and always looking at alternative revenue streams and not putting all your eggs in one basket." 
