Russia says many coronavirus patients died of other causes, putting its official COVID-19 death toll in doubt
Debate has surged in Russia around to what degree coronavirus must exacerbate existing conditions for it to be recorded as the cause of death, and it could be the reason why Russia's death rate is so low. Before she died in a Moscow hospital earlier this month, Liubov Kashaeva, 74, twice tested positive for COVID-19 but her death was not attributed to the virus, however. It was put down to the cancer she had been suffering from. "The medical death certificate ... said she died of a malignant tumour. Coronavirus was not mentioned anywhere," Kashaeva's daughter-in-law, Daria Kornilova said. Ms Kashaeva is one of thousands of Russians infected with COVID-19 whose deaths have been put down to other causes. Russia has registered the second highest number of infections globally wi9th over 308,000 global cases, and 2,972 deaths.  Those figures produce a death rate of 1.88 per 100,000 Russians, according to figures compiled by the Johns Hopkins University. The equivalent figure for the US, who have the most cases in the world, is 27.61 per 100,000 Americans, and 52.45 in Britain.  Comparatively in Australia, where 100 people have died from the virus the rate is 0.40. "We now know all the characteristics of COVID-19 sufficiently well," said pathologist Oleg Zairatyants, author of the Moscow Health Department guidelines for coronavirus autopsies. "The result (of the analysis) is objective and pronounced by the commission ... Unfortunately people are dying, but their cause of death is clear to us," he said, when asked about deaths not being attributed to COVID-19 even when someone had tested positive for the virus. However, the relatives of several deceased patients dispute that their loved ones would have died when they did had it not been for the virus. Ms Kashaeva had been diagnosed with late-stage bowel cancer in January but she was due to start chemotherapy and the family expected to have more time with her. On May 3, Ms Kashaeva was taken into hospital after feeling weak. Scans showed she'd developed pneumonia in both lungs, a common symptom of coronavirus infection, and two tests were taken, coming back positive.  Just 5 days later on May 8, Ms Kashaeva died. "Coronavirus killed our grandmother of course and we're grieving," Ms Kornilova said. "If it wasn't for coronavirus, with chemotherapy she would have held out for some time." Moscow, the epicentre of Russia's coronavirus outbreak, reports that over 60 per cent of deaths of people infected with coronavirus in April did not enter its death toll tally, and were put down to other causes. The Moscow Health Department said the way Russia counted coronavirus deaths was more accurate than other countries and cited the benefits of a nationwide testing programme which has seen over 7 million tests done. Ms Kornilova said she felt that the decision on how to classify her mother-in-law's death "depended on the party line. "And as far as I know, right now, the party line says ... that Russia's death toll must be as low as possible." The Kremlin said Russia's use of autopsies in determining cause of death set it apart from many western countries, who unlike Russia don't rely on a post-mortem analysis. "We're not hiding anything. Cause of death is determined by an autopsy. It's specifically the autopsy that allows us to produce an accurate judgment, on the basis of which cause of death can differ," said Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov Alexey Erlikh, head of intensive cardiac care at Moscow's Hospital 29, which has been designated to treat coronavirus, is one of many doctors that says the distinction is arbitrary. "Simply put, no one ever dies 'from' a virus. People die from complications resulting from a virus," Dr Erlikh said. "But they also die from the complications of a chronic illness that are caused by the virus. Some people believe that such deaths shouldn't be counted in the coronavirus death toll. I believe they should. "On this point I am strongly at odds with some of my colleagues, those top doctors whose pictures are hanging up all over the city." In Britain, all deaths of people who tested positive for coronavirus, and those with a negative test where coronavirus is suspected, enter the death toll, according to Dr Carl Heneghan. "We're not in a position to distinguish dying 'from' or 'with' coronavirus," he said. Speaking anonymously, a Moscow-based pathologist said that making a clear distinction between the two was virtually impossible. The World Health Organization (WHO) says it sees no problems with Russia's approach. "There is no conscious undercounting," Melita Vujnovic, the WHO's chief representative in Russia, told Russian state TV.  "It is possible that some recounts may be done or something else ... but right now I don't see anything serious." ABC/ Reuters 
