Australia started a fight with China over an investigation into COVID-19 — did it go too hard?
It was the interview that sent hares running around the world. One month ago, Foreign Minister Marise Payne told the ABC's Insiders program that Australia would push for an independent international inquiry into the outbreak of COVID-19. Prime Minister Scott Morrison went a step further two days later, suggesting that the World Health Organization (WHO) needed tough new "weapons inspector" powers to investigate what caused the outbreak. It was political dynamite. Australia's friends and allies in Europe, still desperately scrambling to contain the pandemic at home, were startled. Why hadn't Australia got on the phone before wading into such fraught territory? The Chinese Government was — predictably — incensed, accusing Australia of launching a political attack on China and "pandering" to the United States. The furore intensified after China's ambassador hit back by warning of a consumer boycott, and it was supercharged by China's decision to hit Australian exports of beef, and lock in tariffs on barley. But one month after that first interview, the Morrison Government has now emerged battered and bloodied from the diplomatic fray, clutching a piece of paper, and declaring victory. Last night the World Health Assembly (WHA) passed a European Union motion calling for a "comprehensive, independent and impartial" investigation into how the pandemic started and the international health response. A record 137 countries — including both Australia and China — ended up co-sponsoring the motion, giving it overwhelming international endorsement. So was this a blazing victory for Australia and principled diplomacy? Or did the Federal Government blunder into a pointless stoush with China by going too hard, too early? One source in the Federal Government argues the decision to go both hard and early was quite deliberate. While the Government would have liked to gather allies before going public, its options looked threadbare. Australia would traditionally turn first to the US for help building an international coalition, but Australian officials were deeply anxious about the inflammatory rhetoric being used by both Donald Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo on the pandemic. The chances of a US-led inquiry getting broad international support looked perishingly small. The Government also worried that European countries — still reeling after being smashed by the first wave of coronavirus infections — would be too distracted to champion the principle of an inquiry. So, the United States was too keen, and Europe was not keen enough. The Coalition reasoned that if it wanted to kickstart an international debate about an inquiry, then it also wanted to frame the debate on its terms. In the days and weeks after that Insiders interview, both Mr Morrison and Senator Payne hit the phones to rally support. The Foreign Minister logged calls with almost 40 of her counterparts as well as the UN Secretary-General and the WHO's Director-General. The deadline was tight. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade quickly identified the best place to push the inquiry forward — a meeting of the World Health Assembly in Geneva, which was due in only four weeks.   But the initial response was cautious. In a phone call with Mr Morrison, French President Emmanuel Macron backed the broad principle of an inquiry. But he also made it clear that France was deeply preoccupied with containing the virus and did not want to see the international community fractured by an acrimonious debate over the outbreak. The Federal Government quickly realised that it would need to make concessions if it wanted to gather a substantial coalition of countries to push for an investigation. The big compromise came first. The Coalition holds deep-seated concerns about the WHO leadership, and worries it has drawn too close to China. Senator Payne said on Insiders the organisation should have nothing to do with the inquiry, saying that struck her as a "somewhat poacher and gamekeeper" arrangement. But with the clock ticking — and agreement elusive on which other body could possibly take the lead on an inquiry — Australia agreed to narrow its ambition. On May 7 Australia swung its support behind a European Union draft motion which called only for an "evaluation" of the outbreak by some of the WHO's independent review committees. The review committee was already a known quantity, as it had been set up in the wake of the Ebola outbreak.  Multilateral organisations like precedents, and Australian officials thought there was a good chance that other nations would be comfortable with it taking the reins of an investigation.  At this stage the list of co-sponsors was very small, including only the EU, Argentina and some minnows like Monaco and North Macedonia. Still, ducking behind the EU motion not only instantly gave Australia a bloc of allies, it also took some of the heat out of the delicate negotiations on the motion — particularly when it came to talks with Chinese officials. The Morrison Government seems to be betting that all it needs to do is hold its nerve and hold the line when it comes to China's trade threats. The Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister also toned down their rhetoric. Coalition ministers were unyielding in their call for an independent inquiry, but there was much less talk about giving the WHO "weapons inspector" powers. Meanwhile, Australian diplomats poured all their energy into trying to beef up the language in the EU motion to ensure it could provide a workable framework for a proper inquiry. The words "impartial" and "independent" were injected into the text. Simultaneously, officials worked to reassure European countries that the push for an inquiry wouldn't distract from the immediate crisis of tackling the outbreak. As the WHA meeting approached, the momentum behind the inquiry push quickly grew. Two days before the meeting, 62 countries — including major powers like India, South Korea, Japan and Indonesia — had signed on as co-sponsors. That number had swelled to more than 100 by Sunday night, before China finally climbed on board just before the vote on Tuesday. The motion passed by the WHA is a compromise. There is no specific mention of China. There are no new powers for the WHO. And the most likely review mechanism is an independent committee which sits within — not outside — the organisation. The Chinese Embassy in Canberra has been scathing. It says China was always willing to agree to a "scientific investigation" and Australia's initial call for an independent inquiry outside the WHO has floundered. Earlier this week it escalated the dispute further, issuing an extraordinarily contemptuous statement. "To claim the World Health Assembly's resolution is a vindication of Australia's call is nothing but a joke," it read. But Senator Payne argues Australia's key demands have been met, and the Coalition is celebrating the result at the WHA as a clear diplomatic victory. While the committee likely to take on the probe is a WHO body, Senator Payne maintains its expert members are not beholden to the organisation's leadership. "They are from the international system with very broad experience in a range of public health areas," she said. "They serve in their personal capacity, they are not, if you like, part of the WHO structure." The Government also points out that the motion specifically permits "scientific and collaborative field missions" to work out exactly how the disease made the jump from animals to humans.  Queensland senator Matt Canavan called the success of the motion a "massive vindication" for the Government, while Health Minister Greg Hunt said Australia "helped provide the impetus and the resolve" needed at the WHA to push the inquiry motion over the line. Not all foreign policy watchers are so convinced. Associate Professor Matthew Sussex from the Australian National University said Australia's attempt to get out in front of the issue "needlessly annoyed the EU, and further problematised our relationship with China". "There's a good argument to say that we stood to gain more by waiting," he said. "The EU would have gone to the WHA anyway, and Canberra could have played a middle role to mediate whatever hard line Washington had come up with, building consensus and a coalition in the process. "It was an own goal, and hardly a triumph for middle-power diplomacy." Other experts are quicker to give the Federal Government credit. The head of the National Security College, Rory Medcalf, said the Government's call for an independent inquiry was both principled and courageous. Professor Medcalf said the Government got off to a "somewhat ragged start" on its negotiations with other countries, but it "refined and evolved its approach pretty rapidly". "The diplomatic courage and the forthrightness of Australia really taking a stand on this issue will be borne out in the historical record," he said. 
