Global coronavirus cases pass 5 million as situation worsens in Brazil, Russia, India
There are now more than 5 million cases of coronavirus around the world, with a record 106,000 new cases recorded in the last 24 hours, the World Health Organization says. 1 million new cases are now being reported every two weeks WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said two-thirds of the new cases came from just four countries — the US, Russia, Brazil and India. "We still have a long way to go in this pandemic," Dr Tedros said. "We are very concerned about rising cases in low and middle-income countries." Latin America overtook the US and Europe in the past week to report the largest portion of new daily cases globally. It represents a new phase in the spread of the virus, which initially peaked in China in February before large-scale outbreaks in Europe and the United States. Latin America accounted for around a third of the 91,000 cases reported earlier this week. Europe and the United States each accounted for just over 20 per cent. A large number of those new cases came from Brazil, which recently surpassed Germany, France and the United Kingdom to become the third-largest outbreak in the world, behind the United States and Russia. Cases in Brazil are now rising at a daily pace second only to the US. The WHO has come under fire from US President Donald Trump, who accuses it of having mishandled the outbreak and favouring China. This week Mr Trump threatened to withdraw from the WHO and permanently withhold US funding. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Dr Tedros acknowledged having received a letter from Mr Trump, but declined to comment further. The WHO has announced a review into the response to the pandemic. "WHO calls for accountability more than anyone," Dr Tedros said of the review, while declining to give a timeline for it starting. "It has to be done and when it's done it has to be a comprehensive one." The first 41 cases of coronavirus were confirmed in Wuhan, China, on January 10 and it took the world until April 1 to reach its first million cases. Since then, about 1 million new cases have been reported every two weeks, according to a Reuters tally. At more than 5 million cases, the virus has infected more people in under six months than the annual total of severe flu cases, which the World Health Organization estimates is around 3 million to 5 million globally. The pandemic has officially claimed more than 326,000 lives, though the true number is thought to be higher as testing is still limited and many countries do not include fatalities outside hospitals. Over half of the total deaths have been recorded in Europe. Despite the continued increase in cases, many countries are opening schools and workplaces following weeks of lockdown that have stemmed the spread. Financial markets have also been boosted slightly by promising early results from the first US vaccine trial in humans. ABC/wires 
