Chinese embassy ridicules Australia for claiming vindication for global coronavirus inquiry
China's embassy in Canberra says it is a joke for Australia to claim it has been vindicated by international support for a coronavirus inquiry. Key points:The World Health Assembly agreed to an inquiry in Geneva on Tuesday nightThe idea of an independent probe was pushed by Australia, but some aspects have been watered downThe Chinese embassy said the inquiry would be "totally different" to what Australia wantedAustralia was the second country, after the United States, to call for an independent inquiry into the global pandemic, a move which sparked a diplomatic row with China. But last night, at a meeting of the World Health Assembly (WHA) in Geneva, China indicated it would likely back a European Union motion that called for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive" evaluation of the response to the global outbreak. More than 100 countries, including Australia, had already co-signed the motion for the probe into the global outbreak. The motion then passed at the WHA gathering on Tuesday night. Some Coalition MPs and senators have been cheered by the broad international support for the inquiry, with former Cabinet minister Matt Canavan saying Australia had been "massively vindicated" by the "outpouring of support from other countries in the world". But Beijing's embassy in Canberra issued a statement saying the inquiry being considered by the WHA was "totally different" to the one Australia proposed and to claim vindication was "nothing but a joke". "A close look at the draft itself can easily come to such a conclusion," the embassy said in a statement. "All those who know the consultation process that led to the resolution understand this. "To claim the WHA's resolution a vindication of Australia's call is nothing but a joke."The skirmish came after China imposed an 80 per cent tariff on Australian barley overnight, all but killing a lucrative market for exporters. China's ambassador to Australia had previously warned there could be trade ramifications if the Federal Government pursued its bid for an investigation into the origins of coronavirus. Australia's initial inquiry bid watered downAustralia initially demanded that the inquiry be led by an organisation outside the World Health Organization (WHO), with Foreign Marise Payne saying it "strikes me as a bit poacher and gamekeeper". Australia has backed away — at least for now — from its call to hand WHO officials the same powers as weapons inspectors. But the Government argues that Australian officials worked hard to toughen up the language in the draft motion so it specifically says the inquiry must be impartial and independent. The Government also points out that the draft motion states the WHO should investigate the source of the virus, as well as how the virus jumped from animals to humans. Trade Minister Simon Birmingham called the embassy's comment "provocative" but said Australia would not engage in "cheap politicking" over COVID-19. "I would have thought the appropriate response from China's ambassador would be to welcome these outcomes and welcome the opportunity for us to work together on this important issue," he told Sky News. Senator Canavan said the stoush demonstrated why Australia would "need to move away from relying so much on China". "The conduct of the Chinese Government over this period, but also the last few years, has been hard to predict," he said. "It's an increased risk for Australian business. We have to work very hard to establish relationships with other countries."
