Coronavirus impact: Census data shows which Canberra suburbs are most vulnerable to economic effects of COVID-19
Canberra is slowly emerging from the coronavirus pandemic — it has been free of known cases for most of this month. But while social distancing restrictions are easing, the economic consequences of containing the disease are just beginning to be measured. An estimated 8,700 Canberrans lost their jobs last month, the Australian Bureau of Statistics says. It was the largest monthly job loss in the bureau's dataset, which goes back four decades. Similarly, the number of Canberrans who are under-employed (working fewer hours than they want to) almost doubled to more than 22,000 — another record increase. We know from the bureau's survey that almost every job lost in the ACT was casual or part-time. But is it also possible to tell which parts of the city will be the worst-affected? In the pandemic's early stages, a tech firm, Seer Data and Analytics, set about answering a similar question for the New South Wales Treasury's data analytics centre. Seer's chief data scientist, Adam Peaston, said the project's goal was to "shine a light on which communities will be suffering economically". This is not the same as finding the most disadvantaged areas, which are already well known. Instead, Seer modelled which areas were most vulnerable to the business restrictions put in place over the past two months. "We're comparing locations which have a high rate of people employed in vulnerable industries and vulnerable occupations within the context of COVID-19," Peaston says. "We then intersect those types of areas with areas where people are already struggling to keep pace with either their rent or mortgage. "This is where you'd expect to have the combination of large numbers of people losing their jobs and being unable to make payments towards their housing." Seer's technique, applied to ACT and Queanbeyan suburbs (excluding those with fewer than 1,000 people), suggests Canberra's fringes will suffer more than the rest of the city. The analysis weights two factors evenly: Four of the five most vulnerable suburbs are in Gungahlin — Casey, Bonner, Ngunnawal and Franklin — while nearby Macgregor is the other. Other areas of concern are the new Molonglo suburbs of Wright and Coombs which, like Gungahlin's fringes, are home to many families with relatively large mortgages. Meanwhile, Queanbeyan, Bruce and the student suburb of Acton have particularly high numbers of workers with at-risk jobs. Unsurprisingly, the least exposed areas in Canberra are the established, diplomatic-belt suburbs of the inner south, such as Yarralumla, Deakin and Forrest. While suburbs can change over time — the census data is now four years old — Peaston said governments and non-profits need to know where to look to find people in need before their lives fall into crisis. "I think these will be the places to watch carefully, to see if people in those areas are facing residual difficulties, even as restrictions ease," he said. "Perhaps businesses haven't been able to keep as many people employed, or give them enough hours. "There may be large numbers of people there who are about to tip over that housing security threshold." Even more so, he added, if a second wave of COVID-19 cases sparks another lockdown, and even greater economic losses. 
