NSW records one new case of COVID-19, as beauty salons allowed to reopen
NSW has recorded just one new case of COVID-19, as authorities announced beauty and tanning salons and nail bars will be allowed to reopen from June 1. Gyms will remain closed for now, however. NSW Health Minister Brad Hazzard said it was a "good day" to be able to flag the new openings.  "Of all of the requests I've had as Health Minister in the last three months, this has been the one that I think has topped the barrel," he said.  "It has certainly been a very earnest effort from a lot of people to make sure we could open [the salons]." Mr Hazzard advised those beauty business would need to have "a COVID-safe plan" before they reopened, and adhere to 1.5-metre social distancing. "Your task is to not only deliver the services that people need and want, but also make sure they are kept safe," he said. Mr Hazzard also said he was keen to get gyms open as soon as possible, but there were numerous safety elements involved.  He said NSW Health was working with the gym industry to "address the range of issues". Mr Hazzard said aspects — including the use of equipment, the close proximity of participants in elements like spin classes and changerooms at gyms and swimming pools — were all problematic. "There are a whole lot of factors here," he said. The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in the state is now 3,087. Mr Hazzard said the number of tests was fewer than was liked at 6,809, down from 8,995 on the previous 24 hours.  The total number of people tested in NSW to date is now 418,427.  NSW Health's Dr Christine Selvey said the one new recorded case was a person who had returned from the United Kingdom and there was "no risk" of community transmission. NSW Transport Minister Andrew Constance outlined plans ahead of school attendance returning to normal from tomorrow. Parents have been advised to drop children at school where possible, or have students walk or ride if they can. He said the aim was to minimise the numbers of people using public transport. So far numbers have been reduced by 3.3 per cent week on week, with bus use down by 10 per cent. Mr Constance also said there had been 85 million vehicle movements per day, compared with normal levels of 105 million a day. Other measures to be introduced will be a shuttle service running from Moore Park to the city, and also marshals and security teams working in 20 key interchanges including Blacktown, Hurstville and Chatswood. 
