The Australian share market falls, miners rise as iron ore drives a record trade surplus in March
The Australian share market has closed lower, dragged down by the major banks, but mining stocks have risen after iron ore exports contributed to a record trade surplus in March. The ASX 200 ended down by 0.4 per cent at 5,364 points, while the All Ordinaries index lost 0.3 per cent to 5,449. The major bank stocks all fell sharply, including Westpac (-2.3 per cent), NAB (-2.2 per cent), ANZ (-2.2 per cent) and Commonwealth Bank (-1.8 per cent). Energy stocks also weighed on the broader market, with falls for Oil Search (-2.7 per cent), Santos (-1.9 per cent) and Woodside (-1.4 per cent). Mining stocks lifted in afternoon trade, including BHP (+1.9 per cent) and Fortescue (+1.7 per cent), while Rio Tinto finished in the red (-0.6 per cent). It followed a surge in iron ore exports, which rose by around a third in March as some Chinese factories reopened. The Bureau of Statistics says Australia posted a record trade surplus in the month as exports rose while imports fell due to the coronavirus pandemic hitting global supply chains. Exports jumped by 15 per cent or just over $5.5 billion, seasonally adjusted, to $42.4 billion, with a rise in shipments of iron ore, coal, gold and meat. "We think some of the rise in iron ore exports reflects catch-up demand from the previous month, which saw a week of limited shipping activity due to Cyclone Damien," ANZ economists said. Services exports, such as tourism and education, dropped by 9 per cent or nearly $730 million. Income from travel dropped by $657 million, while income from travel-related services was down $734 million in the month. That was offset by a 4 per cent, or nearly $1.2 billion, fall in imports, in particular, travel and transport services. There was a also a drop in aircraft imports over the month, leaving a record trade surplus of $10.6 billion in March, an increase of $6.7 billion from February. The Australian dollar gained some ground, to about 64.4 US cents. Private employers in the US laid off a record 20.2 million workers last month as a forced shutdown of business to stem the COVID-19 outbreak savaged the economy. The ADP National Employment Report suggested that lockdowns in the US to slow the spread of the coronavirus could leave lasting scars on the economy. In addition, the figures for March were revised up to show private payrolls falling by 149,000 jobs over the month. That is instead of the previously reported 27,000 and is the first decline since September 2017. Chris Rupkey, chief economist at MUFG in New York, said the latest numbers indicated a deep economic downturn. "One thing for sure is that this pandemic health crisis has produced depression-magnitude job losses, which means this recovery is going to take longer than many are thinking," he said. "The Great Depression lasted three-and-a-half years, and it will be a miracle if the economy gets anywhere near back to normal within the next couple of years." More companies announced layoffs overnight, including ridesharing firm Uber, which plans to sack 3,700 employees. The cuts to its customer support and recruiting teams represent about 14 per cent of its nearly 27,000 employees. Uber chief executive Dara Khosrowshahi will also forgo his base salary for the rest of the year. His salary was $US1 million ($1.56 million) in 2019. Uber said the cost of redundancies would be around $US20 million. Mr Khosrowshahi said in a letter to staff that "days like this are brutal" and indicated there could be more job cuts to come. Rideshare rival Lyft announced a loss of $US398.1 million from sales of $US956 million, which was better than expected. The number of active users taking a Lyft trip fell over the first few months of 2020 compared to the last few months of 2019. Yesterday, accommodation sharing giant Airbnb announced that a quarter of its global workforce was being laid off. Meanwhile, another Amazon worker has died from coronavirus, according to CNBC. The employee, who worked at an Amazon warehouse in the US Mid-West, passed away on April 18 and his last day at the facility was on March 19. The death comes after Amazon warehouse employees raised concerns that the company was not doing enough to protect them from catching COVID-19 at work. As digital giants come under fire for misinformation about coronavirus on their platforms, Facebook has announced the first 20 members of its oversight board. The board is an independent body that can overturn the company's content moderation decisions. The members include former editor-in-chief of The Guardian newspaper Alan Rusbridger, retired judge and former European Court of Human Rights vice-president Andras Sajo, and law professor Nicolas Suzor from the Queensland University of Technology. On the markets, the Dow Jones index fell for first time in three days in a late sell-off on the job layoff news. The Dow lost 0.9 per cent to 23,665. The broader S&P 500 fell 0.7 per cent to 2,848.42 and the Nasdaq Composite added 45 points, or half a per cent, to 8,854. The US Treasury Department will launch a 20-year bond and increase securities auction sizes across a range of bonds to raise cash amid record US Government borrowing as it battles the coronavirus. Stocks in Europe ended mainly in the red, with Germany's DAX and the CAC 40 in France losing more than 1 per cent. The FTSE 100 index bucked the trend and rose 0.07 per cent to 5,854 as Prime Minister Boris Johnson said his Government was considering lifting some coronavirus restrictions as soon as Monday. West Texas crude oil dropped 2 per cent to $US24.05 a barrel. Spot gold fell below $US1,700 to nearly $US1,686 an ounce. 
