Europe to endure economic shock akin to Great Depression due to coronavirus, finance chiefs say
The collective European economy will contract by 7.7 per cent and inflation in the eurozone will almost disappear this year because of the COVID-19 pandemic, the European Commission forecast on Wednesday. Public debt and budget deficits are also expected to balloon because of economic hardship brought on by the health crisis. "Europe is experiencing an economic shock without precedent since the Great Depression," European Commissioner for Economic and Financial Affairs Paolo Gentiloni said. "Both the depth of the recession and the strength of recovery will be uneven, conditioned by the speed at which lockdowns can be lifted, the importance of services like tourism in each economy and by each country's financial resources." The commission forecast that, as the economy contracts this year, consumer prices will almost stagnate.  The inflation rate will slow to 0.2 per cent in 2020, before accelerating to 1.1 per cent next year, when the eurozone returns to growth of 6.3 per cent. Investment will plunge 13.3 per cent this year, the forecast states. The effort to keep economies alive will boost budget deficits in the eurozone to an aggregate 8.5 per cent of GDP this year, from 0.6 per cent last year, before the gap shrinks to 3.5 per cent in 2021. Coronavirus questions answeredBreaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast.Read moreA surge in public debt, however, will take longer to undo, the commission said, forecasting that eurozone debt will jump to 102.7 per cent of GDP this year from 86 per cent last year. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Italy, Greece, Spain and Portugal will be among the hardest hit, while Luxembourg, Malta and Austria are to weather the shock better. Greek GDP is to contract the most, by 9.7 per cent, with Italy recording the second deepest recession of 9.5 per cent and Spain 9.4 per cent. The budget deficit of Italy, the EU country suffering the most deaths due to coronavirus, will also surge the most — to 11.1 per cent of GDP this year, from 1.6 per cent last year, before falling to 5.6 per cent in 2021, the commission forecast. Find out moreSpain's deficit will top 10 per cent this year, up from 2.8 per cent in 2019, with France close behind at 9.9 per cent. Italy's public debt will also record the biggest increase this year, to 158.9 per cent per cent of GDP, from 134.8 per cent in 2019.  Reuters 
