Coronavirus testing in NSW reaches new record, Gladys Berejiklian warns restrictions to stay for Mother's Day
NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian has warned the state's social-distancing shutdown will not be eased again before Mother's Day. Two of the new cases were at Newmarch House in Western Sydney The national cabinet will meet tomorrow and discuss relaxing restrictions, but Ms Berejiklian said: "I doubt that NSW will be in a position to implement anything before Mother's Day." While the national guidelines for coronavirus social-distancing could be changed tomorrow, Ms Berejiklian said NSW was "very different" to smaller states. "It's important for each state to work within those national guidelines and do what they think is within their state's interests," she said. The Premier said NSW already eased several restrictions this month and needed time to observe the "cumulative" effects of those changes. "We don't want to have a spike in cases that exceeds what we can manage," she said. "The reason we've adopted that approach is to make sure we get back to normal as soon as possible. "I suspect by the end of June, life will feel much more normal than it does now and even during May, life will feel much more normal." The Premier said two adults and their dependent children could visit a household on Mother's Day and several visits could be scheduled across a day. She also pointed to the fact that unlike Queensland and WA, NSW did not have a limit on travel distances and people in Sydney were permitted to make essential visits to regional areas. She said the "greatest gift" for mothers was for children to return to school next week. Health authorities in Australia's worst-affected coronavirus state also confirmed three new infections yesterday. NSW Health revealed a record 10,902 people had been tested for the virus in the 24 hours to 8:00pm. Two of the new infections were staff at Newmarch House in Western Sydney, which could have its licence revoked in light of its climbing death toll. Newmarch House this afternoon confirmed another staff member had tested positive in addition to the two cases announced this morning. Yesterday, Australia's Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission ordered the nursing home's operator, Anglicare, to appoint an external advisor to ensure it was meeting its regulatory obligations. Anglicare today appointed Andrew Kinkade to take on the role for three months. Mr Kinkade has extensive experience in aged care in Australia and the UK and has been contributing to sector-wide preparations and responses to COVID-19. There have been 16 COVID-19 deaths at Newmarch House. 
