Queensland tourism operators say trans-Tasman bubble needed 'yesterday' for COVID-19 recovery
Several major Queensland tourism operators say talk of a 'trans-Tasman bubble' has given them a glimmer of hope that they will be able to get up and running and on the road to recovery. New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern attended Australia's national cabinet meeting on Tuesday with Scott Morrison, discussing the possibility of establishing the travel safe zone. While both leaders admitted it was "some time away", Queensland Tourism Industry Council's Daniel Gswind said it marked an important step in the industry's revival. "We want to make sure every step is taken to accelerate the pace of the state reopening," he said. "The tourism industry employs between 230,000 to 240,000 people and we're quite confident that at least 25 to 30 per cent of those jobs have been lost or suspended. "It is very tough for many and we are hanging on by our fingernails in most cases, so to see some revenue come back is absolutely critically important. "We've gone through a few pain thresholds already and I don't think there is much more the tourism operators can sustain. We've actually gone past a point of pain." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Visitors from New Zealand are becoming an increasingly large part of Queensland's tourism market, particularly for regional hotspots like the Sunshine, the Gold Coast, and the Fraser Coast. Last year New Zealand tourists contributed $600 million to the state's economy. Visit Sunshine Coast chief executive, Simon Latchford, said New Zealand visitors last year accounted for almost a quarter of all tourism dollars, and flights to the neighbouring country were set to expand before the pandemic. "New Zealand has always been, and will continue to be, an extraordinarily important market to us," he said. Mr Latchford said travel between Australia and New Zealand could not resume soon enough for struggling operators. "I don't want to speculate on when this will happen but … yesterday would be great, because clearly we need as much leisure and business action going as quickly as we possibly can," he said. Queensland Airports chief executive, Chris Mills, said the idea of international travel recommencing was providing a small amount of hope to struggling tourism industries.  "I think the sentiment was great. [New Zealand] is such a big market for the Gold Coast," he said. "From our perspective as soon as it's safe to open it up we want to see it fast tracked." The Sunshine State's borders have been closed for more than a month with no date set for them to reopen. Mr Gswind said while international and interstate travel was a vital part of Queensland's tourism market, recommencing travel within the state itself was also essential to the industry's recovery.  "We want to see overnight stays as well becoming a possibility," he said. "The Premier hasn't set a date [for when travel within Queensland will be permitted], but she has indicated that a bit more will be possible by the school holidays in June and we will be able to take advantage of what we have on our doorstep." Regional areas are concerned that even if the trans-Tasman bubble goes ahead, and borders reopen, hard-to-reach locations that most visitors would usually fly to will miss out all together with domestic airlines struggling to remain viable. "Our key priority is having flights that come in," Tourism Whitsunday chief executive Tash Wheeler said. "We are a regional area. Getting dispersal out of cities relies heavily on access and flights and we're looking at ways we can partner with trains and buses. "Access is going to be vital to our success." Mr Gswind said there may also be an upside for regional tourism following the pandemic. He anticipated COVID-19 could pave the way for a boost in sustainable tourism in regional Queensland as more people sought wide open spaces to maintain social distancing while travelling. "I think there is this demand for open space," he said. "Back to nature, back to family, and being together with friends — all of those aspects will contribute to a slightly different tourism future. "We are in a good position to meet the changing expectations of consumers post this COVID-19 crisis and I think we do have to turn the crisis into an opportunity." 
