Maiden voyage for Australian Cattle Enterprises, Australia's newest live-exporter
A new player has emerged in Australia's live-export industry, with Australian Cattle Enterprises (ACE) today loading its maiden voyage out of the Townsville Port. The Darwin-based company might be new, but its founder and managing director Patrick Underwood, is a well-known name in the northern cattle industry and is the former general manager of exporting company, NACC. Speaking to ABC Rural as 4,500 steers and bulls were being prepared for ACE's first consignment to Vietnam, Mr Underwood said it was "a really proud moment". "I've been in the industry for a long time and [starting a company like this] is quite an onerous task, but this is the first shipment for ACE, a new venture, which started as a back-grounding business in northern Australia. "So it's been a big task, but I've had a lot of support from the wider industry and from the Australian government." Mr Underwood said like many businesses, the coronavirus pandemic had caused some "nervous moments" for the new company. "This ship was originally going on April 30, so we delayed it a week at the request of the importer [who was experiencing] slower sales and a two-week lock down in Vietnam. "We understand how important it is to get this right and comply with the regulations in place, both in Australia and overseas," He said finding staff to work on boats during the pandemic had been challenging for the entire live-export trade, but he was happy to have secured a workforce that included respected Australian vet, Dr Ross Ainsworth. "Dr Ainsworth is one of the most experienced vets in the industry and he has undertaken a 14-day self-isolation in Townsville to be allowed on the vessel," he said.  The cattle have all been sourced from Queensland and are being exported to Vietnam's largest importer of Australian livestock, Hoa Phat. The company has two shipments in May and another two planned for June and, according to Mr Underwood, the third shipment due out of Darwin would have buffalo on board as well. "We'll be operating out of northern Australia and we're starting with Vietnam, but we hope to be selling cattle to Indonesia and Malaysia," Mr Underwood said.  
