Why South Australia could lead the nation in economic recovery from coronavirus
South Australia has only recorded one new case of coronavirus in the past fortnight, and the state could be in the box seat to win the race to recovery. There's no denying the global pandemic will have ongoing health implications, especially before a vaccine is developed, but many are predicting the financial implications will last for many years. Just last week, South Australian Treasurer Rob Lucas said he was "horrified" at the inevitable debt the state would accrue over coming years, largely due to spending on coronavirus measures. South Australia is not alone: every state and territory has had increased spending on infrastructure and economic measures to keep people in jobs or subsidise wages for those who have lost work. Some states are expected to suffer more than others, but the news for South Australia has a silver lining. This is largely due to the fact that South Australia doesn't rely as heavily on the industries that are going to be hardest hit. Independent economist Saul Eslake said South Australia's potentially strong position was a "backhanded compliment" for the state — but something it should also attempt to capitalise on. Nationally, Australia saw a gross domestic product rate increase of 2.89 per cent in 2018-19, but South Australia's annual growth rate for the same year was only 1.34 per cent. Usually, having a lower growth rate isn't something to brag about — but, ironically, it could now be the very reason that South Australia might bounce back quicker. "Australia's record-breaking run of economic growth largely owed an awful lot to three things," Mr Eslake said. "Number one, rapid population growth fuelled by immigration. Number two, piggybacking on China's rapid economic growth, industrialisation, and urbanisation. "And three, the housing boom. "One of the reasons why South Australia lagged [behind] the rest of the country over this period was that it derived less benefit from each of these three things." In other words, South Australia's slower economic growth means the state was starting from a lower base, so it didn't have as far to fall. The housing market is likely to be one of the sectors that is hit the hardest, along with tourism. However, South Australia's property market is traditionally more stable than the market in most other states — which could be a significant factor in it bouncing back. "We are in a better position than other states. Our market is less reliant on foreign investment, it's less reliant on investor activity," said Andrew Shields, interim general manager of the Real Estate Institute of SA. "We've also come off two very good quarters of performance in the real estate market so that's definitely positioning us for a good recovery. "Being a conservative market puts us in a much stronger position." While the number of new listings has inevitably declined, the hit has been nowhere near as devastating as initially feared. "We're seeing an average of about 10 per cent drop-off in listing activity, which is far less than what we were predicting," Mr Shields said. While those to the east, and even the west at times, boast of surges in house prices, South Australians usually see much more modest increases. It is for that reason that the SA market may be less vulnerable to the long-term impacts of COVID-19. "Between the election last year and February this year, Sydney and Melbourne in particular saw some quite big price gains," Mr Eslake said. "With worries about negative gearing out of the way and interest rates being cut again, they had a rebound in the property markets." Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. But now, those gains are expected to be all but lost, with many homeowners and investors choosing to defer loan repayments as a way of making ends meet.  "When that expires at the end of September, we'll face higher or longer repayments because the banks aren't foregoing the interest, they're just deferring and capitalising it," Mr Eslake said. "And there'll be some people who've done that, who won't have jobs to go back to, and they may be forced to sell or may choose to sell.  "I don't think [South Australia] will have as many households in financial distress." The South Australian tourism industry has been dealt a double blow this year with the summer bushfires impacting two of its most popular destinations — the Adelaide Hills and Kangaroo Island. It will now take the industry even longer to recover, as travel restrictions due to coronavirus are expected to remain in place for months to come. But if there is a positive for South Australian regions it is that the state's share of international tourists has been much lower than its share of domestic tourists. Like the argument that the state's property sector may bounce back quicker, this means the travel industry may recover sooner too. Australian Bureau of Statistics data shows the number of short-term overseas visitors arriving in South Australia in 2018-19 represented only 3 per cent of the national total. It doesn't mean the state had less tourism — in fact, the figures show the percentage of employment and economic activity resulting from the tourism industry in South Australia is on par with the national average. It just means the tourism figures are largely driven by domestic visitors. "Because you're not as dependent on international tourism, the fact that that's going to take a lot longer to recover is less of a drag on South Australia than it will be for most other states," Mr Eslake said. All of this is not to say the coming months and years of recovery will be easy. But the difficult path to recovery may be made slightly less difficult for South Australia, given its hidden strengths. 
