Coronavirus misinformation and confusion plagues health workers
Dr Charlotte Hespe was upset when she saw acquaintances circulating emails that promoted bogus coronavirus prevention measures. To make it worse, the information claimed to be from an infectious disease expert when it wasn't. In her Sydney general practice, visitors have requested prescriptions for hydroxychloroquine — the anti-malarial drug promoted by US President Donald Trump as a treatment for coronavirus, despite a lack of evidence for it working. Key points:Patients are coming to doctors with misunderstandings and asking for unproven treatmentsIn a health crisis this can be a particular challenge for doctors, some of whom are themselves being put at riskSome experts say the problem is fed by uncertainty about the disease as well as sensational media and online networksHealthcare workers across the country are dealing with a global contagion of online misinformation and confusion about COVID-19, as well as the pandemic itself. Some experts say this is fed by uncertainty about the disease and people's understandable need for concrete information that will keep friends and family safe. But at their worst, such misunderstandings or falsehoods can put health workers and institutions dangerously in the spotlight. For example, in early April, the NSW Nurses and Midwives' Association reported workers were being told by hospital administrators not to wear their uniforms to work after incidents of abuse by people who believed they were spreading the virus. There have been reports of Victorian staff being racially profiled. Hospitals have also been targeted. In the United States, and to a much lesser extent in Australia, people who claim the crisis is exaggerated or invented have encouraged their followers to film health facilities. Dr Vyom Sharma, a general practitioner in Melbourne, said he's most concerned about people who may still doubt the importance of hygiene and social distancing. "The grand irony is that because we've done so well [in Australia] that people don't see how horrific the consequences are," he said. "I don't see us winning this war on misinformation right now. Despite all the things Australia has done well, the one place we have always been behind [in] is the information battle."The risks of unproven treatments and early researchWhile Facebook, Twitter and YouTube now promote links to the World Health Organization and local health bodies, these messages compete in the newsfeed against misinformation or sensational news reports that are often more emotional and engaging, and thus more shareable. For Dr Hespe, medical research from early studies that have not been peer reviewed has been the greatest challenge. She's fielded questions about the impact of pain killers and anti-inflammatory drugs on COVID-19, off the back of early studies regarding ibuprofen and other drugs that have been widely distributed. The patients who asked her for hydroxychloroquine, meanwhile, had been advised by relatives. "They had younger family members who'd heard about it, done some basic research and decided that dad should have it, and so sent dad to have the conversation with the GP," she said. A French study that explored the use of the anti-malarial drug, which was tweeted by President Trump, has had almost 54,000 Facebook interactions according data from the monitoring platform Crowdtangle — an extraordinary number for a relatively dry medical journal paper that has since come under scrutiny by the journal's publishers. Dr Hespe said the media must understand the potential impact when discussing possible COVID-19 treatments that are still unproven. "Not over-promising and under-delivering, even though it's exciting in a news sense," she said. How to talk about conspiracy theoriesDr Chris Moy, the Australian Medical Association's South Australian president, suspects people who have embraced more extreme ideas about COVID-19 — that it was caused by 5G or even Bill Gates — may be unlikely to seek medical care. As a GP in Adelaide, he said he sees patients who don't necessarily believe such theories themselves, but have close relatives who do and are struggling with how to address this lack of shared reality. Of course, scientists are still learning about the disease and how best to treat it — a difficult reality when people want clear, actionable information now to protect themselves and their families. "It is the right mix for a lot of misinformation to happen, but the flip side is, the main messages did get through in the end," he said. Patient autonomy is a "bedrock" of contemporary medicine, said Connal Lee, a health ethicist at the University of South Australia. He suggested medical professionals should understand a patient's experience and start a conversation if they seem doubtful about the doctor's recommendation. "We have seen how a harmful side of misinformation can and does emerge — recently in Melbourne and in the US there have been protests and gatherings that flout the rules and put others in danger," Dr Lee said. "The problem with certain conspiracy groups is that no matter how we respond, it simply feeds into the theory, so we need to be mindful that intervention will not always be successful."A danger to the patient, and the communityDr Sharma in Melbourne is concerned about the risk patients may pose to others if they consume and act on misinformation — as well as the health workers that will treat them if they become ill. He has dealt with the perception among some patients that COVID-19 is a mild illness, for example, just like a cold or flu. "This has the sum total effect of … people just not getting tested," he said. "It informs people's decisions to not socially distance or [to] be much more lax with it."He encourages patients to "fact check" with official sources when they see questionable health information circulating on platforms like WeChat. Dr Sharma agrees with Dr Lee that it's important to make time for a conversation with patients about any contentious views, but the need to do this is even more urgent with COVID-19. Time matters. It's not just the patient's wellbeing at stake if they believe COVID-19 isn't that dangerous or that staying home isn't important, it's about the community's health. "There's a huge asymmetry here," Dr Sharma said. "The risk that an individual poses to the community as a link in the chain of transmission is actually much greater than the risk to themselves."
