Coronavirus restrictions mean big changes to how people grieve and mourn across a range of communities
Lisa Gossling slept by her mother Pat's side in her final days at the nursing home and was there as the 82-year-old drew her last breath. "I said, 'You can do this, it's okay' and she peacefully went in the middle of one of her favourite songs," she said. Within days of Pat's passing, the COVID-19 response went from a few measures to funerals limited to just 10 people. For Lisa, saying goodbye instantly became more complicated. "My brother's got six kids, my sister's got two, we've got three — how do you choose what eight people go to that funeral?" Surfers Paradise Catholic Priest Peter Dillon and his colleague have conducted more than 20 funerals since the March restrictions were put in place. He witnessed first-hand how coronavirus was changing the grieving process. "The family and the loved ones also have the added issue of having to decide who can be there, how they select the closest friends and relatives," he said. For journalist Osman Faruqi, the death of a friend last week came as a shock. Sam, a talented writer and close friend, was just 23 years old. "They were the young person in the prime of their lives who brought so much joy and love to people around them," he said. "Hearing that they had gone has led to this intense flood of emotions that don't quite make sense." Faruqi told The Drum that grieving had been harder than he could have predicted. "To try and make sense of [your emotions], you want to be around people who understand what you are feeling," he said. Travel restrictions have meant it was more difficult for Osman to get back to Sydney, where Sam lived. "I certainly never expected myself to be in a situation where someone very close to me passed away and the first thought I had was, 'Will I be able to attend the funeral? How will I get there and physically be in a space where I can grieve with people?'" Senior Rabbi Yaakov Glasman from the St Kilda Hebrew Congregation said COVID-19 created a "vacuum" of human connection in recent weeks. "My sense is that mourners are more vulnerable then they were before." It is not unusual for hundreds of people to normally attend an Orthodox Jewish Funeral. "[Now] you feel like you are walking into this empty space, it just doesn't have the same kind of spirit," he said. Rabbi Glasman told The Drum that live streaming funeral services were always available but now it is a requirement, rather than an addition. This includes hosting the seven-day mourning period — the shiva gathering — via Zoom. "My sense has been that families that have taken up [that] opportunity have been deeply grateful for it." "When they felt most alone and they felt most vulnerable it was the ability to be able to connect — albeit via Zoom or via technology — that gave them a sense of comfort and a sense of feeling supported during their difficult times." "A good funeral enables people to grieve well, to go through the process of separation from the people they loved," Reverend Dr Colleen O'Reilly told The Drum. Rev O'Reilly said the ritual of a funeral is a fundamental part of making sense of the "chaotic" world people can find themselves in after a loved one has died. Like Rabbi Yaakov Glasman, both the Lebanese Muslim Association and Surfer's Paradise Catholic Parish made the necessary changes to keep the funeral process as "normal" as it could be, in COVID times. Father Peter Dillon was "pleasantly surprised" by his community's response — particularly to the restrictions on the number of people who could be physically present at the event. "Not having to speak to large crowds of people allows us to be a lot more personal, a lot more connected with what is taking place." He's now considering continuing to offer streaming as part of his services post-COVID-19. The Lebanese Muslim Association told The Drum their funeral proceedings would normally involve hundreds, sometimes thousands of people. "The [distancing] rules have been something the community really had to grapple with," he said. The group has chosen not to stream services, out of respect for the deceased. But Ahmad Malas said they were able to find ways to maintain the very communal way of saying goodbye. "People have been providing that continuous support to the family over the phone or through social media like Facebook, WhatsApp." Father Dillon said plans to regroup after restrictions are eased might be too much for some. "People may not necessarily have the inner strength to be able to replicate this again down the track." But for others, it's an opportunity. Pat's body has been cremated and Lisa plans to have a memorial with family and friends when the COVID-19 threat has passed. "I think it's given us a breather to find out what we really want. "I think with time to process it, we'll be like, 'this is the right way forward'." 
