Family self-isolate from coronavirus pandemic in outback Queensland 'oasis'
Keiran Lusk feels strangely liberated by living in coronavirus enforced isolation in outback Queensland. He mows the law in his undies if he feels like it, plays loud music and lifts rocks to keep fit — and couldn't care less what people think about him. He and his young family have paused an epic road trip in a renovated bus to sit out the pandemic as caretakers of a remote property, almost 750 kilometres west of Brisbane. "Living in isolation has provided me with a unique opportunity to be myself," he said. "I am happier and more at peace with myself than I've been in years." With no confirmed coronavirus cases in the region, no neighbours and no visitors, they are far from the stress and anxiety of illness, lockdowns and movement restrictions. "It does feel very surreal out here, we're not affected in anyway, I almost feel a little bit guilty," he said. "It's a very special place to ride out a pandemic, you couldn't ask for better." Mr Lusk is no stranger to isolation. He spent five years living on Moreton Island off the coast of Brisbane, working as a park ranger on the third biggest sand island in the world. "It's like the lighthouse — it's the same sort of remoteness out here," he said. "We actually feel like we're living a similar sort of life that we lived on the island." Mr Lusk spent two years converting an old bus into a mobile home and late last year he and his wife Sam sold up and the family hit the road. "We've been on the road in Bronte the bus for over six months now," he said. "In recent months, we've been slowly plodding around western Queensland and free camping by outback rivers and little country towns, but our plans changed somewhat with the emergence of COVID-19, travel restrictions and nationwide lockdowns. "With no home to return to and camping areas, parks and reserves closing, we were fortunate to find somewhere nearby to stop for a while." They are now caretaking a remote homestead west of Charleville, called Lass O'Gowrie. "We're maintaining the beautiful gardens — it had a prize-winning garden, beautiful lush lawns, it's like an oasis," Mr Lusk said. "We're growing veggies, we've got lots of space and room to move. "The house hasn't got any furniture, but we don't care.  "We're living in the bus at the front door and the boys have got a dedicated Lego room, dedicated Monopoly and games rooms in the house — it's great. "It's wonderfully safe — if it wasn't for the flies we might live here forever." Mr Lusk is conscious that things could have been very different for his family if they had still been in Brisbane during the coronavirus pandemic. "I speak to friends and family in Brisbane, and I guess they're seeing the first hand results of the employment crisis and people that are out of work and shops that are closed — we don't see any of those impacts out here," he said. He said their days had taken on a particular rhythm. Mr Lusk is home-schooling his two boys while his wife works remotely as a public servant. "We're old hands at home-schooling — I wouldn't say that makes us good though," he said, laughing. "It's a lot of work, but having the kids around 24/7 it's wonderful quality time and it's really beautiful to be able to watch the boys develop and spend time with them every day." While reluctant to offer advice on how to deal with life in isolation, Mr Lusk said he had some strategies that had been working for him during these strange times. Be kind to yourself "As someone who has struggled with anxiety and depression over the years, the current opportunity to live in almost complete isolation has been strangely beneficial for me," he said. "I'm learning to be kind to myself. It is OK to have good days and it's OK to have not-so-good days." Have a routine "We are creatures of habit and enjoy having a routine and this has been particularly important," he said. Enjoy being yourself "Living in isolation has provided me with a unique opportunity to be myself, without the fear of others judging me, which is something I've struggled with all my life," he said. "If I want to water the veggie garden or mow the lawn in my undies, then I do it, although this strategy may not work so well for city folk. "Just find time to do the things that make you happy." Exercise "I've set myself a goal to come out of this isolation period feeling much more fit and healthy," he said. "Some mornings I get up early and take a solo ride on my bike around the property. "I'm also exercising with rocks each day — I call it 'rocksercising' … and have a pair of rocks outside the front door and whenever I leave the bus to go anywhere, I do some weights with my rocks as I walk." Sunshine "There is something magic about getting a little bit of sunshine each day," he said. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Mr Lusk said the family would get back on the road in the coming months. "I think we're keen to continue our travels when it is safe and when we're welcome to do so," he said. "This is just a staging ground where we can ride out the crisis and, when travel restrictions are lifted and towns are ready to welcome visitors back, we'll hit the road again." He said he knew his family were "incredibly lucky and fortunate to be where we are during this time". "We do appreciate how privileged we are to be in this situation too — it's not something that we're gloating about or feeling boastful," he said.  "I guess we're just very appreciative of the circumstances that we've found ourselves in". 
