Positive coronavirus tests in aged care residents close two more nursing homes in Melbourne
Two more cases of coronavirus are being investigated at Victorian nursing homes in addition to the case reported at the Villa Maria aged care facility in Bundoora on Monday. Key points:Two residents at aged care facilities in Caulfield and Camberwell have tested positive to coronavirusVilla Maria aged care went into lockdown on Monday after a resident there became a suspected coronavirus caseMiCare's aged care facility at Kilsyth has also entered lockdown as it awaits test results for two residents with flu-like symptomsDeputy Chief Health Officer Annaliese van Diemen said seven new cases of the virus had been recorded in the state since Monday, including two in separate aged care homes. Dr van Diemen said one of the aged care cases was a resident at Lynden Aged Care in Camberwell in Melbourne's east. "The resident is being treated in isolation in a metropolitan hospital," Dr van Diemen said. "Residents and families have been informed by the facility."She said cleaning and contact tracing was already underway. The second case at an aged care facility was a resident at HammondCare's dementia care facility in Caulfield, she said. "A subsequent test has come back negative for that case but we treat all positive cases as positive cases and we don't take any chances," she said. Both aged care facilities will remain closed to visitors for 14 days as a precaution. "At this point in time we don't have a source for the infections at the current facilities so that's why the extensive investigations will continue in the coming days," Dr van Diemen said. Meanwhile, aged care facilities at Kilsyth in Melbourne's east have entered lockdown while they await coronavirus test results for two residents suffering flu-like symptoms. In a statement, MiCare said one resident of its Margriet Manor facility and another at its neighbouring facility Overbeek Lodge were being given special care in isolation while they awaited test results. MiCare said it had tested about a dozen residents for COVID-19 since the pandemic began and all results to date had been negative. The total number of coronavirus cases in Victoria now stands at 1,573, a net increase of six after a previous case was removed due to "reclassification". A statement from the Chief Health Officer said one new case was linked the Cedar Meats outbreak, bringing the total for that cluster to 100, including 64 staff and 36 close contacts. One new case was a returned traveller in hotel quarantine, while three more were under investigation. There were no further cases linked to the McDonald's Fawkner outbreak, with the total number of cases in that cluster remaining at 12. HammondCare senior nurse Angela Raguz said in a statement earlier that further testing was underway and the facility had been placed into lockdown. "HammondCare is treating the result as if it is positive and taking all precautions," Ms Raguz said. She said the resident who tested positive for coronavirus lived in the same cottage as 11 other residents. HammondCare had deployed its outbreak management plan which included additional staff resources and was working closely with the Victorian Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), she said. "Our plan is that there will be information available to families at any time, day or night," Ms Raguz said. "As residents of this home may live with dementia we are especially mindful of their specific needs in what is a challenging time for all residents and staff."Villa Maria aged care in Bundoora went into lockdown after a resident there became a suspected coronavirus case over the weekend. Health authorities initially said the resident was one of Monday's new coronavirus cases but later said the resident had returned an "inconclusive" result that was being treated as positive as a precaution. The home's operator, Villa Maria Catholic Homes (VMCH), said on Monday the entire home was in lockdown as a result and the resident, who had no symptoms, was quarantined in their room. McDonald's distribution centre cleaned following delivery driver's positive testA McDonald's distribution centre in Melbourne has also been closed as a precaution after a delivery driver tested positive for coronavirus. A dozen McDonald's restaurants across Melbourne's north and west closed on Monday due to the positive case, with hundreds of staff asked to self-isolate. A McDonald's Australia spokesman said the company closed the distribution centre last night to conduct a deep clean. He said it was a precautionary measure only and the distribution centre was scheduled to re-open on Tuesday. State Government support for university sector announcedEarlier, the State Government announced a support package for Victoria's university sector, which is struggling to stay afloat during the coronavirus pandemic. Minister for Higher Education Gayle Tierney said the State Government had created the Victorian Higher Education State Investment Fund to supply $350 million for capital works, research, and industry partnerships for universities. Works will focus on new technology and infrastructure that enables universities to conduct new research, commercialise intellectual property and create high-value jobs. The Government is also offering universities payroll tax deferrals valued at about $110 million, providing immediate relief for universities dealing with a shortfall in funds from the downturn of international student enrolments and other revenue loss as a result of coronavirus. Victorian Government announces $350 million for universities to keep staff employed and find new financial opportunitiesMs Tierney said the fund would "help reduce the number of job losses" in the sector due to COVID-19, but was "not the solution". She said the Federal Government was responsible for funding universities but was "clearly" not doing enough to help the sector. "We would like to see them step up and produce more, because here even in Victoria, we have something like 38,000 people employed in the university sector, we want them to be able to keep their job we want to be able to provide a thriving sector," she said. Treasurer Tim Pallas said the Government had spoken to vice-chancellors about the "profound" challenges they were facing. "It's critically important that we understand universities educate future leaders of society and they also help us conduct critical research and ensure we expand our knowledge base and make our lives that much better," Mr Pallas said. But he also said the Federal Government needed to "do more" to help higher education. "The JobKeeper fund does appear to be substantially overfunded for the demand it is currently getting," he said. "The Commonwealth could do more in this space and it's vitally important we all do as much as we can. "We do need the Commonwealth to do more for this sector, it is hurting and it hurting quite profoundly and will have a dramatic impact upon the long term economic vitality of the state and the nation, on the competitiveness of the nation."The Federal Government has so far committed to allowing universities to keep $18 billion in funding budgeted for domestic students, regardless of any drop in enrolments. It has also offered $100 million in regulatory relief for education providers, but denied the sector's requests for easier access to the JobKeeper scheme and support payments to international students.
