Coronavirus update: Tory MPs join calls for Dominic Cummings to resign, New York Times lists 1,000 Americans killed in COVID-19 pandemic
The British Prime Minister's chief adviser, Dominic Cummings, is refusing to quit over reports he broke coronavirus lockdown rules, despite several Conservative MPs adding to calls for his resignation.  Meanwhile, with the US death toll approaching 100,000, The New York Times has printed "just 1 per cent of the toll" on its front page. It came as people across the country got out of their houses for the unofficial start of summer. This story was regularly updated throughout Sunday. This story is no longer being updated. For the latest coronavirus news and updates, follow this story. Boris Johnson's chief adviser is refusing to quit over reports he broke coronavirus lockdown rules, despite several Conservative MPs now joining calls for his resignation. Dominic Cummings, who masterminded the 2016 Brexit campaign, travelled over 400 kilometres to his parents' house during a nationwide lockdown. His wife was showing COVID-19 symptoms at the time. The Prime Minister's office said Mr Cummings visited his parents to ensure his young son could be properly cared for, but the Opposition Labour Party said he flouted the Government's own advice. Mr Cummings told reporters he had no intention of stepping aside when asked if he was going to "consider [his] position". "Obviously not. Don't think so. You guys are probably about as right about that as you were about Brexit," he said. Conservative MPs Steve Baker, Simon Hoare and Damian Collins called for Mr Cummings' resignation on Sunday.  "It is intolerable that Boris' Government is losing so much political capital," Mr Baker wrote on Twitter.  "Dominic Cummings must go." Fellow Conservative MP Damian Collins said Mr Cummings "has a track record of believing that the rules don't apply to him and treating the scrutiny that should come to anyone in a position of authority with contempt". "The Government would be better without him," he said. On Sunday, Transport Minister Grant Shapps, speaking on BBC, said he would not resign. With the US coronavirus death toll expected to surpass 100,000 in the coming days, The New York Times dedicated its front page to 1,000 of those killed by the virus. Page one of its Sunday edition listed the names, ages and brief details of some of the virus victims with the headline, "US deaths near 100,000, an incalculable loss". "They were not simply names on a list. They were us," the front page read. "Numbers alone cannot possibly measure the impact of the coronavirus on America, whether it is the number of patients treated, jobs interrupted or lives cut short. "The 1,000 people here reflect just 1 per cent of the toll. None were mere numbers." The paper said it drew from 1,000 obituaries and death notices in hundreds of US newspapers to highlight the pandemic's individual human toll. The Victorian Government has announced a further easing of coronavirus restrictions, including the reopening of outdoor playgrounds and skate parks, from this Tuesday. On June 1, overnight stays at private residences and tourist accommodation will be allowed, and people will be allowed to have gatherings of 20 people in their homes. Public libraries, entertainment and cultural venues and zoos will also be reopened with numbers limited. The state recorded one further COVID-19 case on Saturday, while another case was reclassified as positive, bringing the total tally to 1,603. Authorities in NSW, where there has been just one new case of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, has announced beauty and tanning salons and nail bars will be allowed to reopen from June 1. Gyms will remain closed for now, however. NSW Health Minister Brad Hazzard said his office received frequent requests for salons to reopen over the past three months. "It has certainly been a very earnest effort from a lot of people to make sure we could open [the salons]," he said. Mr Hazzard advised those beauty business would need to have "a COVID-safe plan" before they reopened, and adhere to 1.5-metre social distancing. He said he was keen to get gyms open as soon as possible, but NSW Health was working with the gym industry on the safety elements involved in reopening. Millions of Muslims around the world are celebrating Eid-al-Fitr, which marks the end of the holy fasting month of Ramadan.  While Muslims are used to celebrating the holiday with large gatherings and congregational prayers, this year the annual holiday has been practised differently amid coronavirus restrictions. In the Middle East, Muslim faithful prayed outside closed gates leading to the Al Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem's Old City as the holy site remained closed amid coronavirus restrictions. In Malaysia, where more than 7,000 people are infected with coronavirus and 115 have died, many Muslim hospital workers spent the day at work. Muslims continued to congregate for Eid prayers on the streets in Indonesia despite government advice to worship at home. However, most worshippers followed the coronavirus guidelines by wearing masks and distancing themselves from each other during prayer. In Pakistan, Muslims held Eid prayers while maintaining social-distancing rules, in accordance with government rules.  More than 1,000 people joined public prayers at an open field in Karachi. Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi says any lawsuits brought against China over the COVID-19 have "zero factual basis in law or international precedence."  Mr Wang told reporters at a news conference on Sunday that China was a victim of the global pandemic alongside other countries and had reached out to assist other governments in need.  "To our regret, in addition to the raging of the new coronavirus, a political virus is also spreading in the US which is to take every chance to attack and discredit China," Mr Wang said. "Some US politicians, heedless of basic facts, have fabricated too many lies and plotted too many conspiracies." Raising such lawsuits "tramples on the international rule of law and abandons the human conscience. It's untrue, unjustifiable and illegal," Mr Wang said.  Those who would bring such litigation against China are "living in a daydream and will humiliate themselves". Many Americans have had their first big break from coronavirus shutdowns for Memorial Day weekend, flocking to beaches and outdoor areas for the unofficial start of the US summer. In Florida, surfside restaurant The Back Porch was packed despite operating at 50 per cent seating capacity to ensure chairs and umbrellas could be appropriately distanced. Newcomers had to wait for places to become free before they could enter. In Arizona, holiday travellers looking for access to some of the desert's canyons and other natural features caused a 24-kilometre traffic jam on the highway, according to the Arizona Department of Transportation. Some recreation areas, including the popular reservoir at Saguaro Lake, became so crowded that authorities had to shut them down. While the Memorial Day holiday that honours fallen members of the US military is on Monday, the weekend leading up to it marks the unofficial start of summer, with Americans traditionally flocking to beaches, gathering at backyard barbecues and unfurling picnic blankets in parks. Arlington National Cemetery, which holds veterans of US conflicts, remained open only to family pass holders who must have a face covering to enter. Access was granted to visit gravesites only, with no touring allowed. In rain-soaked New York, the epicentre of the US coronavirus crisis, Governor Andrew Cuomo discussed his decision to allow up to 10 people to attend ceremonies honouring military veterans, warning that social distancing and face masks should be part of any plans to get together. State beaches in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut were reopened, but rain kept most people away. Elsewhere, Mount Rushmore National Memorial in South Dakota welcomed visitors again on Saturday, earlier than expected. The Northern Territory Government has confirmed restrictions on travel within the NT will be lifted in less than a fortnight. Chief Minister Michael Gunner said the biosecurity zones — limiting travel to remote communities — will be removed almost two weeks ahead of schedule. It comes after land councils called for the travel restrictions to be lifted at the same time as other coronavirus restrictions are eased on June 5. The Government said the interstate travel restrictions would remain in place indefinitely. Prime Minister Scott Morrison has taken responsibility for a $60 billion JobKeeper miscalculation but dubbed an effort to demand answers from the Treasurer a political stunt. A Labor-led coronavirus parliamentary committee will seek to compel Treasurer Josh Frydenberg to explain how the Federal Government overestimated the JobKeeper wage subsidy program by $60 billion. "But what it means is Australians won't have to borrow as much money," Mr Morrison said.  Opposition Senate Leader Penny Wong said a COVID-19 committee examining Government measures in response to the coronavirus wanted to quiz the Treasurer about the mistake. "The chair of the Senate Committee, Senator [Katy] Gallagher ... will call Josh Frydenberg to give evidence," she said. "What I would say to Josh: 'This is your opportunity to front up and explain $60 billion blunder to the Parliament and to the Australian people'." Meanwhile, the Government's COVIDSafe app has hit six million downloads, still below the 40 per cent rate cited by the Government as the minimum needed for the app to be effective. Clive Palmer says he will lodge documents with the High Court this week, arguing Western Australia's border closure is unconstitutional. The mining magnate wanted to visit WA for meetings with businesspeople, senator Mathias Cormann and potential 2021 state election candidates for his United Australia Party, but was rejected due to coronavirus restrictions. "Closing down the border is not only an act of stupidity by WA Premier Mark McGowan, but it is against the Australian constitution and I am confident the High Court will see it that way as well," Mr Palmer said in a statement on Sunday. Mr Palmer said he would lodge the legal documents on Monday and hoped to have a directions hearing in the High Court by the end of the week. Mr McGowan said on Friday he endorsed the WA Police Commissioner's decision not to grant Mr Palmer an exemption from the travel ban. The city of Wuhan, the original epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak in China, conducted 1,470,950 nucleic acid tests for the virus on Friday, the local health authority said. Some 1,000,729 tests had been completed the previous day. By comparison, as of Friday, Australia had conducted more than 1,192,262 tests since the outbreak began. Wuhan kicked off a campaign on May 14 to look for asymptomatic carriers — infected people who show no outward sign of illness — after confirming on May 9-10 its first cluster of COVID-19 infections since its lockdown was lifted on April 8. Authorities have said they aim to test all 11 million of the city's residents, an exercise likely to cost more than 1 billion yuan ($220 million). China on Saturday reported no new confirmed cases for the first time since it began announcing infections in January. Brazil has prohibited most foreigners from entering the country for another 30 days. The country is home to the second-highest number of confirmed coronavirus infections in the world after the United States. Commercial traffic is not affected by the measure and Brazilians and local residents will be allowed to enter. The decision was published in the official Gazette on Friday night, citing "health reasons". Brazil has reported more than 330,000 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and more than 21,000 deaths. Experts consider those numbers under counts because of the lack of widespread testing. US President Donald Trump went on his first golf outing since the coronavirus pandemic broke out, visiting his club in the Washington suburbs in a purposeful display of normalcy. Mr Trump's motorcade took him from the White House to Trump National Golf Club, and he was spotted wearing a white cap and white polo shirt. It was his first time at a golf property since March 8, when he visited his club in West Palm Beach, Florida. That was the same weekend when he met at his Mar-a-Lago retreat with Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro, whose press secretary later tested positive for the virus. Some White House staffers who had been in contact with the press aide went into quarantine afterward but none tested positive. Mr Trump is eager to promote the idea that the United States is returning to normal, although the death toll from the coronavirus outbreak continues to rise. Mr Trump's coronavirus task force coordinator, Deborah Birx, told a White House briefing on Friday that Americans over this Memorial Day weekend should "be outside, play golf, play tennis with marked balls, go to the beach — but stay six feet apart". The Department of Agriculture in Guam has invited hunters to participate in a pig-hunting derby to provide food for families in need during the coronavirus pandemic.  The two-day derby is scheduled to begin next Saturday, the Pacific Daily News reported.  The department released a statement saying the derby was intended to feed families, foster familial hunter development and reduce the feral pig population.  Event organisers are working with mayors to distribute pigs whole and unprocessed to residents within their villages and provide safe handling guidelines. A 107-year-old Iranian woman who was infected with coronavirus has recovered, Iran's semi-official Fars news agency has reported. The woman, Saltanat Akbari, was admitted to the Khansari hospital in the central city of Arak.  She was released from the hospital after spending "some time" in isolation. "She defeated the virus with the help of doctors and nurses at the hospital," the report said. Iran is one of the most affected countries in the Middle East, with 133,521 cases and 7,359 deaths.  Russia on Sunday reported 153 coronavirus deaths over the past 24 hours, the epidemic's highest daily toll, raising total fatalities to 3,541, the country's coronavirus crisis response centre said. It also said 8,599 new cases had been documented, fewer than on the previous day, pushing the nationwide tally of infections to 344,481. More than 40 people have tested positive for COVID-19 after attending a religious service in Germany. The service was held at a church in Frankfurt on May 10, after lockdown restrictions were eased. Church officials said they adhered to social-distancing rules, and had disinfected the building ahead of the service. Germany has recorded low numbers of coronavirus compared to much of Western Europe, allowing the country to ease restrictions over the past two weeks. Several thousand followers of Spain's far-right Vox party have gathered in Madrid and other cities to protest the Government's handling of the coronavirus outbreak. Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez announced that the country would reopen for international tourism from July, as the country emerges from one of Europe's strictest lockdowns. Its football league will be allowed to resume from June 8. Vox called for protesters to come in their cars and motorbikes to skirt the current prohibition on social gatherings in effect under a two-month long state of emergency. "Let your desire be heard for the resignation of the Government," Vox leader Santiago Abascal said from the open-top bus leading the cars inching down a Madrid boulevard. Vox called the protest the 'Caravan for Spain and Liberty'. Most cars were decked with Spanish flags and there were also small groups of people who participated on foot, with some not respecting the two-metre social distancing rules.  More protests were held in Barcelona, Sevilla and other provincial capitals. Over 28,000 Spaniards have been confirmed to have died from COVID-19. The lockdown successfully reduced the daily contagion rate of over 20 per cent at the height of the crisis to under 1 per cent for the past week. Hundreds of deaths from "coronavirus-like symptoms" have raised fears COVID-19 is rapidly spreading undetected throughout war-torn Yemen, where the United Nations and medical workers say the health care system "has in effect collapsed". According to official numbers, Yemen has confirmed 212 infections and 39 deaths, but with one of lowest rates of testing in the world, aid workers fear this figure is "just the tip of the iceberg". Medicins Sans Frontieres reported on Friday as many as 80 people were dying at home per day — up from a pre-outbreak norm of 10 — in the city of Aden, where the international aid group run the only dedicated COVID-19 centre in southern Yemen. This week Jens Laerke, spokesman for the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, told a Geneva briefing that after five years of war and now a pandemic, "Yemen is really on the brink" and its health system "has in effect collapsed". Medical workers in southern Yemen told the ABC that some staff had been detained or threatened by authorities for sharing information about the outbreak on social media. Sources inside Yemen say there are no lockdown measures, curfews or social distancing in place. A new cluster of coronavirus infections has broken out in Malaysia at a detention centre for undocumented migrants, authorities have confirmed. Malaysia has this month arrested more than 2,000 foreigners for not having permits that allow them to be in the country following raids in areas under lockdown. The centres they are detained in are often crowded, with dozens of migrants packed in a single cell. The United Nations and rights groups have called on Malaysia to stop the crackdown and criticised authorities for going after a vulnerable community during the pandemic. The South-East Asian country has so far reported 7,185 virus infections and 115 deaths. The health ministry said on Saturday that 21 cases were identified at the Semenyih detention centre near the capital Kuala Lumpur, which houses around 1,600 detainees. It is the second detention centre at which a cluster of virus infections has broken out. Around 60 cases were reported among the 1,400 detainees at the Bukit Jalil centre earlier this week. In recent weeks, there has been public anger towards refugees and other foreigners, who have been accused of spreading disease, burdening the state and taking jobs as the economy plummets.  Rohingya refugees in particular have been targets of harassment and threats. Thailand has begun testing a vaccine against the coronavirus on monkeys after positive trials in mice, an official says. Thailand's Minister of Higher Education, Science, Research and Innovation, Suvit Maesincee, said researchers had moved testing of the vaccine to monkeys and hoped to have a "clearer outcome" of its effectiveness by September. "This project is for the human race, not just Thais," Dr Suvit told reporters on Saturday. The Prime Minister has outlined a policy that we must develop a vaccine and join the world community workforce on this." Thailand announced on Wednesday it was developing a vaccine — one of at least 100 potential vaccines in the works worldwide — and hoped to have it into production by next year. The vaccine candidate being tested by Bangkok's Chualongkorn University and two public sector partners harnesses messenger RNA technology, which unlike older types of vaccine does not contain any of the virus it seeks to attack. It instead uses part of the virus's genetic code to ultimately produce antibodies inside the human body. Thailand has several active COVID-19 vaccine-development projects, including separate cooperative efforts with China and the United States. ABC/Reuters/AP/AAP 
