China reports no new daily coronavirus cases for first time since pandemic began
China has recorded no new confirmed COVID-19 cases on the mainland for the first time since the pandemic began in the central city of Wuhan late last year.  However, it had continued to see an influx of imported cases, mainly involving Chinese nationals returning from abroad The National Health Commission (NHC) said in a statement on Saturday (local time) there had been no daily rise in the number of cases compared to four new cases on the previous day.  It said, however, there were two new suspected cases: an imported one in Shanghai and locally transmitted case in the north-eastern province of Jilin. New asymptomatic cases of the coronavirus fell to 28 from 35 a day earlier, the NHC said. China had seen a sharp fall in locally transmitted cases since March as major restrictions on people movement helped it to take control of the epidemic in many parts of the country. However, it had continued to see an influx of imported cases, mainly involving Chinese nationals returning from abroad, while new clusters of infections in the north-eastern border provinces of Jilin and Heilongjiang have emerged in recent weeks. Wuhan also reported this month its first cluster of infections since a lockdown on the city ended on April 8, prompting authorities to warn that counter-epidemic measures could not be relaxed and to launch a campaign to test all of Wuhan's 11 million residents for COVID-19. There are still some restrictions in place for locals, as people with the virus are still being monitored and treated. China's Government had begun using hyper-vigilant measures to track and trap remaining cases. The first case of the virus was identified in China's Hubei province and believed to have originated from The Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market in Wuhan. While Wuhan China had been the epicentre of the outbreak for many months, South America has become a new epicentre of the COVID-19 pandemic with Brazil hardest-hit.  Cases are rising in some African countries that so far have a relatively low death toll, the World Health Organization (WHO) said. "The COVID-19 pandemic today reached a milestone in Africa, with more than 100,000 confirmed cases. The virus has now spread to every country in the continent since the first case was confirmed in the region 14 weeks ago," the WHO said in a statement, noting there were 3,100 confirmed deaths on the vast continent. Wuhan has a population of more than 11 million people, which is greater than New York City, where more than 10,000 people have died because of COVID-19. Many suspect China's official figures remain conservative, speculating there were more victims in the early weeks of the outbreak who died without being tested. On Saturday afternoon, the number of confirmed cases in the mainland stood at 82,971 and the death toll remained unchanged at 4,634.  Reuters/AP 
