Gold Valley Iron put into voluntary administration, leaving Kimberley contractors out of pocket
An iron ore company in Western Australia's East Kimberley has been put into voluntary administration only six months after restarting the mothballed Ridges mine, 165 kilometres south of Kununurra. At a meeting of creditors held on February 25, administrators from KordaMentha were appointed to Gold Valley Iron Ore (GVI), which was given the right to mine the Ridges iron ore deposit owned by Kimberly Metals Group in a deal last year.  It is understood work at Ridges stopped last week while administrators assessed the financial position of its operators from Gold Valley. KordaMentha partner Richard Tucker said early indications were that the company had racked up about $10 million of debt, and that local contractors had been left out of pocket. "Our role since our appointment has been focused on trying to find a solution to recommence operations, such that local businesses and the larger contract creditors could be supported [and] employees could go back to work," he said. "As part of that there's been a lot of good will from both the employees and the major contractors, and we were able to a get a non-binding term sheet where someone would provide several million dollars to recommence operations. "However, unfortunately, events superseded that and the right to mine was terminated by the owner of the mine; so the ability to continue to mine in the existing structure is now unlikely. "Gold Valley Iron has not yet been liquidated, it will be up to creditors to decide the future of that specific entity." Mr Tucker said Kimberley Metals Group owned the tenement, and that it would be up to it to decide on the future of the mine. KMG has been contacted for comment, but the ABC understands the company is making efforts to find a way to get the site back up and running in the coming weeks. It is yet another roadblock for the embattled Ridges iron ore project, which was put into care and maintenance in 2015 by KMG, laying off 220 workers following the mine's closure. The Chinese-owned group began operations in 2011 and also own the undeveloped, higher grade Matsu iron ore deposit 10km south of the Ridges mining operation. The company's chairman, ZhengZeng Du, is also Chair of Tangshan Ganglu Iron and Steel Co. Ltd, which is one of the largest privately-owned steel mills in China. KMG shipped 6.2 million tonnes of high-grade ore to China from the Wyndham Port until it closed its doors four years ago due to poor commodity prices. At the time it was a huge blow to the town, with several other big commodity projects also shutting up shop amidst a mining downturn in the region. East Kimberley Chamber of Commerce president Steve Sharpe said it was disappointing to see local business left out of pocket. "We're not sure of the details of exactly how many local contractors have been affected," he said. "We know there's been a lot of local business keen to support the start-up of the mine. Subscribe for the national headlines of the day. "The possibility that a project like Ridges starting up was bringing to the community, it was a bit of hope for people and it's just really unfortunate this has happened. "It's certainly a huge blow in a region where Argyle diamond mine is heading towards closure, and people are bracing themselves for that." Mr Sharpe said another big resources or infrastructure project was needed to give the region a boost. It has also been a volatile time for iron ore prices in recent weeks due to the coronavirus outbreak. After reaching five year highs last year exceeding $110 USD per tonne, iron ore is now trading at $89 US dollars per dry metric tonne. Mr Tucker said investigations were in their early stages, but several factors had led to the present situation. "It would appear as though it's a combination of the fact it's a relatively low-grade deposit [and] the costs associated with starting up an operation and insufficient working capital to do so," he said. It appeared there were other early signs of trouble for the project when a dispute emerged between Gold Valley and Elmore Limited, a minerals processing company previously trading as IndiOre. A memorandum of understanding was signed last year which proposed Elmore process ore mined by Gold Valley at Ridges on a contractual basis. According to Elmore's quarterly report released on September 30, the company had "secured the mobile processing equipment required" but said it had been "repeatedly held back from commencing the contract".  Elmore "continued to try and work with GVI to resolve the impasse", the report said. Only three months later, Elmore announced to the ASX on January 14 that the mineral processing agreement had been terminated. "The contract stipulates that Elmore will be paid $1 million plus compensation for lost earnings due to the contract being terminated by repudiation," the company said. The announcement also revealed that Gold Valley Iron had started civil action against Elmore over the payment of plant equipment sold to it from a project GVI had acquired called Frances Creek mine in the Northern Territory. By February 17, administrators had been called in from Hall Chadwick, and then replaced by KordaMentha at a creditors meeting later in the month. Since that time several contractors have contacted the ABC and said they have not been paid for their work since Ridges restarted last year. Gold Valley Iron is a Perth-based private explorer that is part of the Gold Valley Group chaired by Singaporean businessman Mr Yuzheng Xie. According to its website the group has interests in mining, agriculture and energy in WA, the Northern Territory and Queensland. ABC has not been able to get in touch with a representative from Gold Valley Iron. 
