Elvis biopic to resume filming in Queensland post coronavirus, Screen Queensland says
Elvis has not left the building — that's the message from film industry insiders who say the team behind Baz Luhrmann's biopic is "very committed" to restart filming in Queensland post coronavirus. Production of the film at Village Roadshow Studios on the Gold Coast was among the first casualties of the industry in Australia after Tom Hanks, who plays Elvis's manager Colonel Tom Parker, tested positive in March. Screen Queensland chief executive Kylie Munnich has been in contact with the film's production team and told the ABC as soon as restrictions have been lifted they planned to pick up where they left off.  "I know that they just closed the doors on stages and have stored the sets because they are absolutely committed to restart that film," she said. "They had done so much work in pre-production. "It's definitely their intention to get back into production here and they loved being in Queensland — they told me that many times. "I know they want to get back here and get started." Actor Michael Balk from the Actors and Entertainers Benevolent Fund Queensland said the impact of COVID-19 had left thousands of people in the film and television industry out of work. "Like Elvis in Queensland — there are around 1,500 people who are employed in a production like that," he said. "Obviously it effects everyone from the performers in front of the camera through to the crew, through to the people who are supplying to a film like that." Ms Munnich said two other major productions in Queensland — Harrow and Jonathan M. Shiff's Bureau of Magical Things — had also stopped work, as had several other smaller-scale productions.  "Just those three productions alone employed hundreds and hundreds of people," she said.  "There would be projects that were also getting ready to go into production where they've had to halt, so it's had a profound impact." The Media Entertainment and Arts Alliance (MEAA) said an estimated 4,500 film technicians, creators and performers remained out of work.  Michelle Rae from the MEAA said many had been looking for work in other industries while still paying off gear and equipment. She said she was worried the industry was at risk of losing decades of experience as people moved into other jobs out of necessity. "It is day by day for them. There are lots of conversations with banks and debt holders about being able to push that back," she said. Mr Balk said he shared those same concerns. "We're looking at a potential skills loss, where people that have been working for decades, if not longer, will suddenly be forced to change career," he said. Even though restrictions are easing, Mr Balk said the industry would still have challenges with social distancing. "Sound operators can't get close to the talent, performers can't have intimate scenes without breaking that 1.5-metre barrier," he said. Ms Munnich said some in the industry had been finding ways to produce work on a smaller scale. "Whether it's television commercials, film or TV [or] our games industry which is very robust in Queensland, you'll find people trying to come out from under this," she said.  Not all workers are eligible for government grants, given the nature of their role and the industry. Screen Queensland has launched several initiatives, including a $3.3 million support package aimed at allowing productions to keep working behind the scenes to prepare for the moment the "green light is given". "You can imagine that there will be a bottleneck ... in Queensland, Australia and internationally," Ms Munnich said.  "There'll be this real surge in production needing to happen." 
