Coronavirus update: Boris Johnson resisting calls to sack Dominic Cummings, South Korea records new cases as Seoul authorities close nightclubs
The British Government says Prime Minister Boris Johnson's adviser Dominic Cummings did not break coronavirus lockdown guidelines when he took a journey of 400km while he had COVID-19 symptoms, despite calls for him to face the sack. Elsewhere, South Korea has reported 23 fresh cases of coronavirus, mostly from the densely populated Seoul area where authorities shut down thousands of nightclubs, bars and karaoke rooms in a desperate attempt to stem transmissions. This story will be regularly updated throughout Saturday. This story is no longer being updated. For the latest coronavirus news and updates, follow this story. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson is resisting calls to sack his chief adviser, Dominic Cummings, after reports he broke the Government's own lockdown rules by travelling 400km while ill with COVID-19 symptoms. Mr Cummings, who masterminded the 2016 campaign to leave the European Union during the Brexit referendum, travelled to his parents' house in Durham in northern England in late March, when a strict lockdown was already in place. A lockdown that began March 23 stipulated that people should remain at their primary residence, leaving only for essential local errands and exercise, and not visit relatives. Anyone with symptoms was told to completely isolate themselves. Mr Johnson's office said in a statement that Cummings made the trip because his wife was showing coronavirus symptoms, he thought he was likely to also get sick, and relatives had offered to help look after the couple's young son. "Owing to his wife being infected with suspected coronavirus and the high likelihood that he would himself become unwell, it was essential for Dominic Cummings to ensure his young child could be properly cared for," a Downing Street spokesman said. "His actions were in line with coronavirus guidelines. Mr Cummings believes he behaved reasonably and legally."  The spokesperson said Mr Cummings stayed in a house "near to but separate from" his extended family. Dave Penman, the leader of civil servants union the FDA, said "the Prime Minister needs to understand how heartbreaking this lockdown has been for so many families and the sacrifices that have been made up and down the country." He said Mr Johnson must explain why "it looks like there is one rule for those at the centre of government and one rule for rest of the country." South Korea has reported 23 fresh cases of coronavirus, mostly from the densely populated Seoul area where authorities shut down thousands of nightclubs, bars and karaoke rooms in a desperate attempt to stem transmissions. The figures announced by the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention brought national totals to 11,165 cases and 266 deaths.  Thirteen of the new cases came from Gyeonggi province surrounding Seoul, which on Saturday ordered the closure of an additional 2,629 bars and karaoke rooms, bringing the number of shut entertainment venues to 8,363. But there’s growing concern over the steady rise of infections in the greater capital area, where about half of South Korea's 51 million people live. More than 200 of the recent infections have been linked to clubgoers in the Seoul metropolitan area.  China recorded no new confirmed COVID-19 cases on the mainland for May 22, the first time it had seen no daily rise in the number of cases since the pandemic began in Wuhan late last year. China's National Health Commission (NHC) said in a statement that there were four new cases on the previous day, including an imported one in Shanghai and locally transmitted case in the north-eastern province of Jilin. China has seen a sharp fall in locally transmitted cases since March as major restrictions on people's movement helped it take control of the epidemic in many parts of the country. But it has continued to see an influx of imported cases, mainly involving Chinese nationals returning from abroad, while new clusters of infections in the north-eastern border provinces of Jilin and Heilongjiang have emerged in recent weeks. Wuhan also reported this month its first cluster of infections since a lockdown on the city ended on April 8, prompting authorities to warn that counter-epidemic measures could not be relaxed and to launch a campaign to test all of Wuhan's 11 million residents for COVID-19. The number of confirmed cases in the mainland stood at 82,971 and the death toll remained unchanged at 4,634.  Former NBA superstar Patrick Ewing is in isolation in hospital after testing positive. Ewing, who spent 13 of his 15 seasons in the NBA with the New York Knicks through the 80s and 90s, now coaches the men's basketball team at Georgetown University in Washington DC. The 57-year-old said he chose to share his diagnosis publicly to emphasise how dangerous the virus was. "This virus is serious and should not be taken lightly," he said. "I want to encourage everyone to stay safe and take care of yourselves and your loved ones. Now more than ever, I want to thank the healthcare workers and everyone on the front lines. I'll be fine and we will all get through this." Ewing won a national championship with Georgetown in his playing days, won two Olympic gold medals, was an NBA All Star 11 times and reached the finals with the Knicks in 1994. He was inducted into the basketball hall of fame in 2008. The WHO has identified South America as the new "epicentre" of the pandemic as the virus accelerates across South America. Brazil reported more than 2,100 deaths in the past two days, bringing its total toll to 21,048, as the number of cases soared above 330,000. The country now has the second-highest number of cases in the world, overtaking Russia and behind only the United States' official count of 1.6 million. The true number — both of cases and deaths — in Brazil is likely higher than the official count, as Latin America's top economy has been slow to ramp up testing. Across South America, infections rose and intensive care units (ICU) were swamped in Peru, Chile and Ecuador, countries lauded for imposing early and aggressive business shutdowns and quarantines. Many experts said the rising death toll across Latin America showed the limits of government action in a region where millions make a living in informal jobs and many police forces are weak or corrupt and unable to enforce restrictions. In Chile, more than 90 per cent of ICU beds were full last week in the capital, Santiago, where the main cemetery dug 1,000 emergency graves to prepare for a wave of deaths. Ecuador's Government declared a 2:00pm to 5:00am curfew in March, among other measures, but cases have swamped medical and mortuary services in the city of Guayaquil and the capital, Quito. Hundreds of people can be seen violating the curfew daily in Ecuadorian cities, many selling goods on the streets to earn enough to buy food. Malaria drug hydroxychloroquine, which US President Donald Trump says he has been taking, was tied to increased risk of death in a study of 96,000 COVID-19 patients, according to a paper published in the widely respected medical journal The Lancet. The study found people treated with hydroxychloroquine, or closely related drug chloroquine, had higher risk of in-hospital death when compared to those who had not been given the drug. Mr Trump has said he is taking hydroxychloroquine to protect against the virus, even though his administration has warned it can have deadly side effects. The head of Italy's pharmacological agency has also weighed in on the lack of data to suggest it is effective against COVID-19 as Italy conducts its own limited trials of the drug.  A Harvard University medical professor involved in the study said the results were clear. "We asked a question: is there any benefit whatsoever in using any one of these regimens in hospitalised patients with COVID-19? And the answer is a fairly conclusive no," Professor Mandeep Mehra said. "Then we asked if there's no evidence of benefit, is there evidence of harm — and that too was surprisingly a yes." Researchers reported a coronavirus vaccine developed by Chinese company CanSino Biologics appears to be safe and induced a rapid immune response in its first human trial. First-in-human studies, known as Phase I trials, are primarily designed to test safety. This vaccine did not cause any serious adverse effects, the researchers said in The Lancet, though they did report some side effects such as fever. Blood samples from the 108 vaccinated adults showed so-called neutralising antibodies and T-cell responses against the novel coronavirus, a sign of possible efficacy. "These results represent an important milestone," co-author Professor Wei Chen from the Beijing Institute of Biotechnology said in a statement. "The ability to trigger these immune responses does not necessarily indicate that the vaccine will protect humans from COVID-19. We are still a long way from this vaccine being available to all." Further studies will be needed to confirm whether the vaccine protects against infection. The first such trial is underway in Wuhan, China. The UN disarmament chief says the COVID-19 pandemic is moving the world toward increased technological innovation and online collaboration, but "cybercrime is also on the rise, with a 600 per cent increase in malicious emails during the current crisis." Izumi Nakamitsu told an informal meeting of the UN Security Council on Friday that "there have also been worrying reports of attacks against health care organisations and medical research facilities worldwide." She said growing digital dependency had increased the vulnerability to cyberattacks, and "it is estimated that one such attack takes place every 39 seconds." Estonia's Prime Minister, Juri Ratas, whose country holds the Security Council presidency and organised Friday's meeting on cyber stability and advancing responsible government behaviour in cyberspace, said: "The COVID-19 crisis has put extra pressure on our critical services in terms of cybersecurity." He said the need for "a secure and functioning cyberspace" is therefore more pressing than ever and he condemned cyberattacks targeting hospitals, medical research facilities and other infrastructure, especially during the pandemic. "Those attacks are unacceptable," Ratas said. "It will be important to hold the offenders responsible for their behaviour." Meanwhile, UN peacekeeping chief Jean-Pierre Lacroix says there have been 75 cases of COVID-19 in the UN's 13 far-flung peacekeeping missions, which have a total of 110,000 troops, police and personnel. There are 10 cases of COVID-19 in the mission in Congo, three cases in the Cyprus mission, two in Central African Republic and one each in Lebanon and the UN Truce Supervision Organisation in the Middle East. Iran has moved to open businesses, religious and cultural sites as it eases restrictions imposed to contain the coronavirus pandemic. Museums and historical sites are to reopen on Sunday to coincide with the Eid el-Fitr celebrations that end the Muslim holy fasting month of Ramadan, President Hassan Rouhani said. Holy shrines will reopen on Monday. Mr Rouhani had said last week that the shrines would open for three hours in the morning and three hours in the afternoon. Some areas of the shrines such as narrow corridors will stay shut. All workers in the country will return to work next Saturday. The President said last week that restaurants would reopen after Ramadan and sports activities would resume without spectators. Universities, but not medical schools, will reopen on June 6. Mr Rouhani said on Saturday that 88 per cent of the fatalities from COVID-19 in Iran were victims with underlying illnesses. Britain will introduce a mandatory 14-day quarantine period for travellers arriving from overseas from June 8, a measure that airlines have warned will devastate their industry. All international arrivals, including returning Britons, will be required to self-isolate and provide details of where they will be staying to the authorities. "Now we are past the peak of this virus, we must take steps to guard against imported cases triggering a resurgence of this deadly disease," said Home Secretary Priti Patel. She said those who breached the quarantine in England could be fined 1,000 pounds ($1,863), and that spot checks would be carried out by health and border officials. The quarantine measures will not apply to those arriving from the Irish Republic, and there are also exemptions for freight drivers, medical professionals and seasonal agricultural workers. Religious gatherings will resume in France after a two-month hiatus caused by the COVID-19 outbreak. The French Interior Ministry said the gatherings would be permitted from the start of June, but worshippers need to wear face masks and observe social distancing of at least 1 metre. The French Government had banned religious services until June 2 even though stores and other businesses started reopening last week. The Council of State, the country's highest administrative body, struck down the ban and the Government published a decree on Saturday allowing services to resume. France has announced 393 new cases of coronavirus in the past 24 hours, continuing a downward trend. Authorities say seven people appear to have been infected with the coronavirus at a restaurant in north-western Germany, in what would be the first such known case since restaurants started reopening in the country two weeks ago. The local government in Leer county said on Friday night that the cases, reported between Tuesday and Friday, led to at least 50 people being quarantined.  Previously, no new cases had been confirmed in the area for over a week. Germany started loosening its coronavirus restrictions on April 20 and that process has gathered pace recently.  Lower Saxony state, where Leer is located, allowed restaurants to reopen on May 11 with hygiene precautions. Colombia has reported its biggest daily increase in new coronavirus cases and deaths as the South American nation's Ministry of Health confirmed 801 new infections and 30 fatalities. Over a quarter of the new cases are in the capital city of Bogota, which has the highest number of COVID-19 infections in the country.  Nationwide, Colombia has diagnosed nearly 20,000 people with the virus. The nation has been on lockdown for nearly two months, though authorities recently began allowing some manufacturing businesses to begin operating. A wider economic opening is expected to take place throughout June. The nation's caseload has been comparatively smaller than other nations in the region: Brazil has confirmed over 300,000 cases and Peru over 110,000. Russian President Vladimir Putin said the outbreak in Russia has begun to abate, creating a positive environment for easing restrictions. Russia currently ranks third after the United States and Brazil in the number of infections with 326,448 cases, including 3,249 deaths. The Russian leader said a steady drop in new cases, from almost 7,000 new cases per day at the peak of the outbreak, to roughly 3,000 now, sets the stage for further lifting of restrictions. Mr Putin noted that the country's hospitals can accommodate over 165,000 coronavirus patients, and they are currently two-thirds occupied. He acknowledged the need to preserve hospital capacity in case of a new wave of contagion as restrictions lift. The COVID-19 mortality rate in Russia has remained remarkably low at about 1 per cent, drawing suspicions in the West that the country was under-reporting its death toll.  Russian officials have rejected the claim, saying that the low toll reflected efficient preventative measures and broad testing. A review of studies around the world by British researchers has found that people under 20 have a 56 per cent lower risk of catching COVID-19.  The review is not without its doubters, however, as some researchers such as those at University College London have said evidence remains "weak" on how likely children were to transmit the virus to others. "Our findings show children and young people appear 56 per cent less likely to contract COVID-19 from infected others," the review team said. "Susceptibility is a key part of the chain of infection, and this supports the view that children are likely to play a smaller role in transmitting the virus and proliferating the pandemic, although considerable uncertainty remains. "This new data provides essential evidence to governments around the world to inform their decision-making on whether to reopen schools and reduce or end lockdown measures." Hertz has filed for bankruptcy, unable to withstand the coronavirus pandemic that has crippled global travel and with it, the heavily indebted 102-year-old car rental company's business.  The US's number two car lease company's lenders were unwilling to grant it another extension on its auto lease debt payments past yesterday's deadline.  Hertz and its subsidiaries will continue to operate, according to a release from the company.  By the end of March, Hertz Global Holdings Inc — whose car-rental bands also include Dollar and Thrifty — had racked up $18.7 billion in debt with only $1 billion of available cash.  "No business is built for zero revenue," former CEO Kathryn Marinello said on May 12. "There's only so long that companies' reserves will carry them." In late March, Hertz shed 12,000 workers and put another 4,000 on furlough, cut vehicle acquisitions by 90 per cent and stopped all nonessential spending. Under bankruptcy protection, creditors will have to settle for less than full repayment. Its biggest creditors are banks, but the filing lists IBM, Lyft, United and Southwest Airlines as others owed between $6 million and $23 million each. The coronavirus pandemic is interrupting immunisation against diseases including measles, polio and cholera that could put the lives of nearly 80 million children under the age of 1 at risk, according to a new analysis from the World Health Organization and partners. In the new report, health officials warned that more than half of 129 countries where immunisation data were available reported moderate, severe or total suspensions of vaccination services during March and April. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "Disruption to immunisation programs from the COVID-19 pandemic threatens to unwind decades of progress against vaccine-preventable diseases like measles," WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said in a statement. UNICEF reported a significant delay in planned vaccine deliveries due to lockdown measures and a dramatic reduction in the number of available flights. "We have effective vaccines against measles, polio and cholera. While circumstances may require us to temporarily pause some immunisation efforts, these immunisations must restart as soon as possible or we risk exchanging one deadly outbreak for another," said Henrietta Fore, UNICEF's executive director. "We cannot let our fight against one disease come at the expense of long-term progress in our fight against other diseases." More than 40 of Africa's 54 nations have closed their borders, though some allow cargo and emergency transport, and 46 campaigns to vaccinate children against polio have been suspended in 38 countries, the majority of which are also in Africa. Measles campaigns have been suspended in 27 countries.  A spokesperson for British Prime Minister Boris Johnson says Government ministers trust principals to make their own decisions in allowing students back to school. The comment comes as the UK Government prepares to release its "roadmap" plan to reopen the UK. Mr Johnson's Government has faced criticism from some teachers and unions over their plan to reopen schools to some pupils from June 1.  They say the move is too early and others that they have little time to prepare buildings for a return under social distancing measures. "We continue to work closely with teachers, schools and the unions to address their concerns," the spokesman said.  "The roadmap sets out plans to get more children into schools in the safest possible way from June 1 at the earliest and we will set out more details on our plans as soon as we can. "We trust head teachers to know the best course of action for their own schools." US President Donald Trump has deemed churches and other houses of worship "essential" services and called on governors to allow them to reopen this weekend despite the threat of the coronavirus. "Today I'm identifying houses of worship — churches, synagogues and mosques — as essential places that provide essential services," said Mr Trump. He said if governors don't abide by his request, he will "override" them, though it's unclear what authority he has to do so. Mr Trump stressed the importance of churches in many communities and took issue with some of the businesses that had been allowed to reopen. "Some governors have deemed liquor stores and abortion clinics as essential" but not churches, he said. "It's not right. So I'm correcting this injustice and calling houses of worship essential." "These are places that hold our society together and keep our people united. The people are demanding to go to church and synagogue, go to their mosque," he said. ABC/wires 
