NT Government establishes Territory Economic Reconstruction Commission to help coronavirus recovery
Chief Minister Michael Gunner says the Northern Territory is "uniquely positioned" to lead Australia's post-pandemic economic recovery and has established a special commission to figure out exactly how to capitalise on the crisis. In announcing the initial membership of the Territory Economic Reconstruction Commission on Friday, Mr Gunner said Australia was going through a "once-in-a-lifetime crisis" which could also be a "once-in-a-lifetime opportunity" for the Territory. Mr Gunner said post-COVID-19, Australia would have to become more self-reliant and the future for manufacturing was in the North. "We look at our solar reserves and our gas reserves and we are uniquely positioned to solve Australia's problems — we need to take advantage of that opportunity," he said. Mr Gunner said the Commission would investigate how to create jobs in the NT, attract investment and build on its strategic advantages — establishing it as "Australia's comeback capital". "We are a $26 billion economy right now, I believe we can be a $40 billion economy by 2030 with 35,000 new jobs," he said.  See more news and analysis about this year's NT election. But it will be at least six months until any of the Commissions' recovery plans become a reality — with an interim report expected to be handed down in late-July and a final report in November. Commission members include Gary Higgins, who retired as opposition leader in January; Infrastructure Australia CEO Romilly Madew; NT Treaty Commissioner Mick Dodson; Beyond Zero Emissions CEO Eytan Lenko; former NT chief minister Paul Henderson; former secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet Martin Parkinson and former CEO of Westpac Gail Kelly.  Next week, Mr Gunner will announce two more Commission members and its co-chairs.  Each of the nine members can earn up to $44,000 a year for their contribution, which means for six months' work each person can pocket up to $22,000 — a total cost to the taxpayer of $198,000.  Opposition Leader Lia Finocchiaro, who took the helm at the Country Liberal Party in January, criticised Mr Gunner's fiscal management over his Government's term — claiming the Committee would not be necessary if the NT Government had managed the books better. "For four years under Labor our economy has become the worst-performing economy in the nation," she said. "It is not credible three months out from the election for the Gunner Government to say to Territorians: 'we have a plan'. The fact is, they don't." "The need for this reconstruction commission really reflects the inability of the Gunner Labor Government to to generate growth in our economy." Yesterday, the NT announced it had zero active cases of coronavirus, with all 29 confirmed cases of COVID-19 now recovered.  Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. Despite the good news and calls from industry, Mr Gunner said he would not commit to a date when the NT's borders would re-open.  "I know that the calls for us to quickly relax our hard borders will grow louder," he said.  "The danger of coronavirus is still out there and we need to keep it out." Mr Gunner said as soon as there was a "hard date" for when the NT's strict border security measures would ease, he would make the announcement and ensure there was plenty of time for NT businesses to plan their recovery. 
