Queensland trio terminate Australian rugby contracts amid pay dispute during coronavirus shutdown
Three Queensland Reds players, including Wallabies lock Izack Rodda, have ended a stand-off with Rugby Australia (RA) by terminating their contracts. Rodda, along with Reds teammates Harry Hockings and Isaac Lucas, had refused to take short-term pay cuts of an average 60 per cent that their Australian Super Rugby counterparts accepted following the suspension of the competition because of the coronavirus pandemic. This move prompted the Reds to stand down the three players ahead of last Monday's return to training. The players' agent, Anthony Picone, argued the Reds had no legal grounds to do so and this morning he confirmed the termination of their RA and Queensland Rugby Union (QRU) contracts. "It is disappointing the QRU chose to air the issues publicly," Picone said in a statement. "Given the parlous state of rugby in Australia and Queensland we offered the organisation the opportunity to deal with these matters in private and confidentially. This offer was rejected." The trio were the only players of the 192 Australian Super Rugby professionals to baulk at the salary hits that will be revised once a schedule and broadcast deal is finalised for the truncated competition due to begin in July. Rodda, who has played 25 Tests for the Wallabies, was reportedly at odds with Reds coach Brad Thorn and seeking a move to a rival Australian team. Hockings, a lock who is regarded as one of the rising stars of Australian rugby, and fly half Lucas were believed to be assessing their options overseas. Rodda and Lucas were both contracted until 2023, while Hockings was off contract at the end of this season. "This is their livelihood. It is only reasonable that talented players want to secure stable employment during these times," Picone said. Picone has long ruffled feathers at the Reds. He arranged a move to Japan for former Reds captain Samu Kerevi last year, while he also facilitated the exits of Wallabies players Will Genia and Liam Gill. RA and QRU are yet to comment on the decision made by the three players. The development comes after RA made changes to its leadership team in recent weeks, as it struggles to meet the financial challenges caused by the coronavirus shutdown. Hamish McLennan was announced as its new chairman last week, while Rob Clarke was appointed interim chief executive earlier this month. Clarke replaced Raelene Castle, who stood down as chief executive in April. AAP 
