Winter woollies arrive just in time for Indigenous community in coronavirus lockdown
Donations of warm clothing have been distributed to locked-down residents at a central Queensland Indigenous community just ahead of an expected cold snap. The eased restrictions were cancelled after a confirmed case of COVID-19 in Rockhampton, so the community has relied on donations of warm clothing Woorabinda has been in lockdown for two months and last week the community voted to ease restrictions enough to allow residents to do essential shopping in Rockhampton over the following two Saturdays. This was cancelled after a nurse in Rockhampton was diagnosed with COVID-19, so the community put out a call for donations — and it was answered. Warm clothes, blankets, towels and shoes were delivered this week and the Red Cross coordinated distribution to the community just in time for overnight temperatures falling as low as two degrees in some parts of central Queensland this weekend. Red Cross service manager Rhonda Hill said the arrival of winter woollies was a highlight in a challenging time.  "People are still in good spirits, but it was a little disheartening, especially after the community vote, and we were going to get out and get the winter clothes," said Ms Hill. "It is what it is, and we understand and accept it.  "It's about our safety, especially our elders." Tight restrictions under the Federal Biosecurity Act mean any resident who leaves must quarantine for 14 days before returning.  Woorabinda Aboriginal Shire Council negotiated two 12-hour windows for essential shopping with the local disaster management group before the COVID-19 case in Rockhampton. It will review the situation next week.  Since the lockdown, a transfer station at the entrance to Woorabinda is a link to the outside world where supplies are left twice a week. It also gives families an opportunity to see each other. "It's quite hard for grandparents to see grandchildren — they just want to hug but they can't do that because we've got to respect the 1.5 metre distance," Ms Hill said. "But seeing them has given us an opportunity to have that peace of mind." The Red Cross and other organisations in Woorabinda collect goods delivered to the station, sanitise them and organise collection by the family. "This brings such a relief to families and it's well received by the community," Ms Hill said. 
