Coronavirus combines with end to interest-only home loans in big hit coming for investors, experts warn
House prices are tipped to fall by 11 per cent over the next three years as the COVID-related economic downturn bites, and for one group of Australian homeowners, it could not come at a worse time. Key points:Many small-scale investors use interest-only loans to buy propertyThese loans convert to principal and interest after a set timeThis increases financial pressure for those hit by the COVID downturnThere are an estimated 730,000 investors, many of whom are self-funded retirees or people planning for retirement, who have taken out interest-only bank loans in the belief property was a safe bet. Coronavirus has already delivered challenges, including rent arrears and the prospect of losing their tenants altogether. But now these private landlords are facing big hikes in their monthly bank repayments as they switch from interest-only to paying off the principal of their loans as well. Max Green is one of many who has been trying to negotiate with the banks for an extension to the interest-only period of his loans. The 69-year-old and his partner have bought two properties — one in Brisbane, the other in Perth — in the past 10 years to help fund their retirement. But the value of the Brisbane property has flatlined and the Perth property, a unit in the city's outer suburbs, has plummeted from $425,000 in 2016 to $300,000 today, according to a recent valuation. "The intent was … to provide us with some equity growth in the properties, which would then assist us in the future once I had retired," Mr Green said. "We had been advised that we would be able to extend the interest-only period."Instead, the couple face paying an additional $1,900 a month from July as they begin to pay off both the principal and interest on their loans. Mr Green said he still enjoyed his work as a project manager at WA's Water Corporation, but conceded his retirement ambitions had not gone to plan. He said he would now be forced to either keep working beyond 70, dip into the couple's superannuation to pay the banks, or sell at a loss. Investors brace for massive lossesOthers with similar investment plans have already decided to cut their losses and are now facing negative equity as a result — where their home is worth less than the amount they owe. Wayne Grimes, 50, said he couldn't help but laugh when he considered the price he would likely now get for his luxury investment unit. "I'm laughing because it is just ridiculous," he said. "I bought it for $670,000 … and I'll be lucky if I'm able to sell it for $400,000."The two-bedroom, two-bathroom house in the inner-city area of West Perth has been on the market for five weeks, but Mr Grimes has wanted to sell it since 2017 when his interest-only loan was converted to principal and interest. "Originally when I bought that place I was getting $895 a week in rent and now I get about $415 a week," Mr Grimes said. "That coupled with [paying] principal and interest, there has been a big hit to our cash flow."Like many investors, Mr Grimes put his savings into property to try to get ahead for retirement. "The whole idea behind it was so that we wouldn't have to rely on government pensions and government handouts when we got older, that we would be self-sufficient and create our own wealth," he said. "But it hasn't worked out that way."Mr Grimes said his bank had been very helpful in allowing him to defer his loan payments for six months due to coronavirus, which would buy him time to sell the West Perth property, albeit at a huge a loss. He faced being left with a $180,000 debt. "I'm not here to blame anyone, it's no-one's fault, it's just that this is how the market has gone," he said. Call for interest-only extensions by defaultSenior Liberal MP Dean Smith has raised the prospect of a "tsunami of forced sales" by desperate landlords offloading properties in a falling market. The party's chief whip in the Senate said he had received reports from investors around the country struggling with mortgage repayments. Some had been forced to sell, while others were at risk of losing their own homes. Sharp rise in unemployment could trigger house price crashThe spread of coronavirus across Australia could see unemployment reach about 10 per cent and house prices drop 20 per cent, says one economist. "If property investors are forced to sell into a falling market, then that is a cost that every Australian property owner will have to bear," he said. "That will put downward pressure on an already dampened property market and that will harm the financial wellbeing of every Australian family that owns a property, not just property investors."The West Australian senator argued the banks should by default, honour requests by borrowers to extend their interest-only periods to help them ride out the COVID crisis. "Some of the stories these property investors have told me are heartbreaking and the banks should be ashamed," he said. "What I see is a great opportunity for a non-taxpayer-funded stimulus where the banks could be more responsive to ease some of that financial pressure that people who are on interest-only repayment arrangements are experiencing just before they move to principal and interest."Senator Smith said extending interest-only loan periods had been common practice before regulators imposed responsible lending limits in 2015, but those restrictions had since been eased. He was seeking support from Government, Opposition and crossbench MPs for an inquiry into interest-only loans and the banks' handling of them during the COVID crisis. Banks already helping '700,000' customersThe Australian Banking Association would not comment directly on Senator Smith's call for banks to roll over interest-only terms by default during the COVID pandemic. But chief executive Anna Bligh said in a statement the industry had worked tirelessly since the beginning of the outbreak to help businesses and individuals doing it tough. Ms Bligh said 700,000 customers had already applied for, or been granted, support on loans totalling more than $200 billion. "Investors whose tenants are unable to pay rent as a result of COVID-19 are able to access a six-month deferral to mortgage repayments, including principal and interest, to help them get through to the other side of this crisis," she said. "Interest-only options are still available to customers, with banks needing to assess a request to remain on interest-only repayments on a case-by-case basis, in line with regulators' prudential requirements and guidance."Analyst fears a 'perfect storm' comingThe impact of forced sales by investors facing negative equity would certainly place further downward pressure on the housing market, according to CoreLogic head of research Tim Lawless. "I think it's something that lenders will be very conscious of once we reach the expiry of the leniency policies that are in place at the moment, which will be towards the end of September. That's something we need to watch very carefully," he said. But Mr Lawless said he believed the impact on many borrowers of switching to principal and interest (P&I) would be cushioned by the significant fall in interest rates. "The interest-only loans typically have a mortgage rate of around about 3.5 per cent, whereas a principle and interest loan will typically have a interest rate of 3.2 per cent, so there could be some cost-saving there for those investors who do transition from interest-only to P&I," he said. "By and large the best strategy … would be to try to secure the best P&I mortgage rate possible and pay their debt down rather than just continuing to pay off their interest. "But of course not everybody can do that."Analyst Martin North, from Digital Finance Analytics, said 8 per cent of property investors were looking to offload their properties in the coming months. Mr North said the COVID-19 crisis had created another pressure point for investors already struggling with the migration of their loans to principal and interest, plus other factors. "We've got a perfect storm emerging, particularly for property investors," he said. "We've had a very significant increase in the number of units on the market and some of those would have previously been used by international students, but of course they didn't come back [for the new term]. "Some of those would have been used by Airbnb, but they haven't come back."But Mr North said he did not support Senator Smith's call on banks to extend the interest-only terms for property investors. "Strategically, it does not make a lot of sense to me," he said. "We've got to deal with the amount of debt in the system. "We have too many property owners with too much debt, they're too leveraged."
