Chinese President Xi Jinping defends coronavirus response, backs WHO-led investigation
Chinese President Xi Jinping has defended China's handling of the coronavirus outbreak, saying his country will support a "comprehensive" World Health Organization-led review into the global response after the virus is brought under control. Key points:Chinese President Xi Jinping says his country has acted with "openness and transparency" throughout the coronavirus outbreakMr Xi said China would support a WHO-led investigation into the pandemicAustralia is expected to back a draft resolution from the EU calling for an independent inquiryMr Xi told the World Health Assembly in Geneva that China had been open and transparent about the coronavirus outbreak, which started in Hubei province in late 2019, and said his country would support an investigation "conducted in an objective and impartial way". "This work needs a scientific and professional attitude, and needs to be led by the WHO," Mr Xi told the assembly via a video message. "And the principles of objectivity and fairness need to be upheld."His comments came as the US blasted the WHO's response to the pandemic and took a thinly-veiled swipe at China for an "apparent attempt to conceal" the initial outbreak, and WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus signalled an independent review would begin as soon as possible. China will also provide $US2 billion ($3.1b) over two years towards helping with the COVID-19 response, and Mr Xi promised any vaccine developed by his country would be made a global public good. Mr Xi did not indicate whether China would vote for a joint resolution by Australia and other countries calling for an independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus pandemic. He described the pandemic as the "most serious global public health emergency" since World War II and defended his country's handling of the crisis, which has come under fierce criticism from the United States and President Donald Trump. "All along we have acted with openness and transparency and responsibility," Mr Xi said. "We have turned the tide on the virus". The World Health Assembly is the annual meeting in Geneva of all 194 members of the World Health Organization, but due to coronavirus this year's assembly is being held online. US blasts WHO response, takes swipe at ChinaLast month, Mr Trump accused the WHO of being a "pipe organ for China" and on Monday his health secretary continued the attack. Without mentioning China by name, Health Secretary Alex Azar made it clear Washington considered the WHO jointly responsible. "We must be frank about one of the primary reasons this outbreak spun out of control," Mr Azar said. "There was a failure by this organisation to obtain the information that the world needed, and that failure cost many lives.""We saw that WHO failed at its core mission of information sharing and transparency when member states do not act in good faith. "This cannot ever happen again."Dr Tedros, who defended the organisation's alerts, said "WHO sounded the alarm early, and we sounded it often". When the WHO declared a global emergency on January 30, he said, there were fewer than 100 cases outside China, and no deaths. Push for independent coronavirus inquiryAustralia is one of almost 120 WHO member nations backing a European Union draft motion calling for "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of the "international health response to COVID-19". Australian Health Minister Greg Hunt delivered an address on Monday backing the EU resolution and outlined Australia's response to the crisis. "We are pleased to have support for an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation of the global response," Mr Hunt said. "We need to learn the lessons from this pandemic and ensure we have the strongest possible global health architecture, with an enhanced ability to prevent and respond to future outbreaks."Australia was the first nation after the US to call for an independent probe, including into the initial handling of the outbreak in Hubei, drawing angry protests from China. But since then, it has toned down some of its demands, while working to both toughen up — and gather support for — the EU motion. Dr Tedros, who has always promised a review, told the forum it would come "at the earliest appropriate moment" and make recommendations for the future. He received robust backing from the WHO's independent oversight panel. "Every country and every organisation must examine its response and learn from its experience," he said, adding that the review must cover "all actors in good faith". The EU resolution is expected to be debated and adopted on Tuesday.
