Super funds have been battered by coronavirus, but panic is your worst enemy
The year began so well. In the first seven weeks of 2020, our super funds were charging ahead as the stock market went from record high to record high. It was a continuation of 2019, which had been the best year since 2013, prompting respected ratings house Super Ratings to predict that, "super members have every reason to be optimistic about 2020." Fortunately for Super Ratings, it added this caveat: "But when it comes to a repeat of 2019's double-digit returns, it would be wise to temper expectations." How right they were. Between February 20 and the March 23 the stock market crashed by 36 per cent. If ever you needed convincing that financial markets have become completely divorced from reality, just look at Wall Street's wild swings, writes Ian Verrender.  As a result, according to Super Ratings, the median balanced superannuation fund fell 8.9 per cent in March, while the median growth fund, with its higher exposure to shares, plunged 12.5 per cent. Ouch! If you are closer to the end of your working life than the beginning, and you have hundreds of thousands of dollars in your super fund, that's a lot of money gone in just a few weeks. But, like everything in life, superannuation needs some perspective. The reality is, most superannuation funds are heavily leveraged to the stock market, and markets go up, and they go down. Finding the best super arrangement can be complicated. But it's an important part of you and your family's financial future — and taking steps to improve your retirement savings may be easier than you think. Australia's biggest super fund, Australian Super, tells its members to expect to lose money five years out of 20. The hope is that the gains in the other 15 years will more than make up for the five years of losses. For Australian Super, the average annual return on its balanced fund since inception in 1985 is 9.68 per cent, despite the bad years. The last negative year for Australian Super's balanced fund was at the peak of the global financial crisis in 2009, when it lost 13.4 per cent. Since then it's been 10 consecutive years of gains, seven of them double digits. So, quite understandably, while no one was expecting COVID-19 and the havoc it's wreaked on the global economy, we should not be surprised that, at some point, our super funds were going to have a bad year after a decade of going forward. The reality for our superannuation from what's happened so far this year is that most of the gains from 2019 have been erased. It's not Armageddon, and we still have the benefits of the previous nine consecutive years of positive returns. Which raises a really important question. If you are losing a lot of sleep about what's happening to your superannuation in 2020, maybe you are in the wrong fund? Financial adviser Louise Lakomy, from Crystal Wealth Partners, told the ABC she received a big spike in calls from worried clients as the stock market tanked in March. "And that raised in my mind the issue of risk profile," she said. "If you are going to react so severely to your super going backwards, are you in the right risk profile for you?" A key tenet of investing is to choose investments that match your tolerance for risk or, more accurately, your tolerance for seeing your investment go backwards. As efforts to control COVID-19 appear to be gaining traction, many analysts and traders are hoping for a quick return to business as usual. They're likely to be disappointed, writes Ian Verrender. After a decade of seeing their super funds going onwards and upwards there are many people who are probably shocked to see them losing money and, at the same time, realising they would probably rather be in a fund that's not as exposed to the share market. The problem of course is that to change investing strategy now — to a more conservative, less share market-focussed option — is to crystallise the losses and, even worse, as Louise Lakomy explained. "No one rings a bell at the bottom of the market," she said. "If you're out of the market you'll miss the recovery." The year 2009 is a case in point. After being devastated by the GFC, the stock market hit its low point on February 28 that year. A stunning turnaround followed and by the end of 2009 it had soared by 46 per cent. While superannuation is not set and forget, it is a long-term investment that will go up and down, and we shouldn't overreact to the downs. One thing history has taught us is that the stock market may fall further, but it will come roaring back. The only thing we don't know is when. 
