Coronavirus border wars have NSW, WA, Queensland premiers playing firmly to their home crowds
They're not neighbours, yet somehow New South Wales and Western Australia have managed to engage themselves in a border skirmish. The verbal grenades between the two state's premiers have created fresh cracks in the relatively harmonious cooperation between the states and territories over coronavirus. So what's really going on? While a medical expert panel drove the decision to shut Australia's international borders, decision-making about domestic travel has been made by individual states and territories. Those with closed borders — the Northern Territory, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania and Western Australia — have cited health reasons for their reluctance to reopen them too quickly. But NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian clearly has her state's economy in mind as she calls for these borders to reopen. NSW is heavily reliant on tourism and even though it's unlikely to see international travellers for some time, allowing more domestic holiday-makers would help struggling accommodation, food and entertainment businesses. Last year, 39 million domestic travellers visited New South Wales, spending more than $23.5 billion. Almost $10 billion of this was spent by 14.8 million holidaymakers. In comparison, just over 4 million domestic travellers chose to holiday in WA, spending more than $3 billion. WA's border closure — creating what Premier Mark McGowan dubbed "an island within an island" — has not dramatically hurt the state's all-important resources industry. Interstate fly-in, fly-out workers have been able to enter the state because the resources industry was deemed an essential service by the WA Government. So borders aren't as big an economic issue for WA as they are for NSW. But clearly the spat is not just about economics, as Ms Berejiklian suggested to ABC News Breakfast this morning. "I'm sure those premiers are getting more popular in their states for keeping their borders closed," she said. Her theory could help explain why the Queensland Government has joined in on the border wars, despite the importance of domestic tourism to the local economy. More than 10 million holidaymakers spent more than $9.5 billion there last year and its tourism industry wants the borders reopened. Yet today Queensland Tourism Minister Mark Bailey echoed Mr McGowan in saying NSW was in no position to be "lecturing" other states. WA has closed its borders to the east for the first time in history. Here's how you might be affected. "NSW needs to get its act together and get community transmission down, and we will all be better off throughout this nation, including in Queensland," he said. Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk faces an election in just over five months, which Peter Kennedy, Adjunct Professor of politics at Notre Dame University, said was a key factor in her Government's stance. "I think the Labor Government in Queensland does have a close eye on that poll, understandably, and they would be playing to what they believe to be the best interests of Queenslanders and what also would be electorally popular," he said. In the Northern Territory last week, Chief Minister Michael Gunner was keen to remind his citizens that they lived in the "safest place in Australia" as he poured the first beer since pubs reopened last week. In WA, where the rest of Australia is known as "the Eastern States" and Liberal politicians debated a "WAxit" secession motion just three years ago, Mr McGowan has also played to the local crowd. Mr McGowan has claimed WA was being "bullied" by NSW and said he didn't want to be told what to do by a state which allowed the Ruby Princess coronavirus outbreak to occur.  "New South Wales had the Ruby Princess — I mean, seriously? And they are trying to give us advice on our borders, seriously?" he said yesterday. With sky-high approval ratings, he is undoubtedly keen to maintain this domestic support when he contests the next state election in March. "Western Australians don't like being told by other states what to do, but this is one example where our geographic isolation has worked in our favour," Professor Kennedy said. Latest information from the WA Health Department But the state's health experts have been clear public safety is driving the decision-making in WA, which has a relatively low level of coronavirus infections. For this reason, West Australians still can't even travel freely within their state, due to regional border closures, let alone to other parts of the nation. And that's unlikely to change anytime soon. 
