Generation Z employees pose dilemma for some employers, and technology is key for retaining younger staff
Grocery outlet owner, Kevin Allen, hired three Generation Z butchery apprentices, none of whom completed their training, before he found 'the one'. Mr Allen said while taking a seminar led by a workplace psychologist, he learnt that Gen Z workers, born from the mid-1990s onwards, were raised in a different technological age from that of their predecessors, the Millennials, born from the mid-80s to the mid-90s. Adopting workplace technology more suitable to his younger workers led to better communication and happier staff, he said. "I've opened up a Messenger account on my phone, and I've got every single employee on the Messenger now, so I can send a message out to them all individually," Mr Allen said Regular team meetings where employees could discuss any challenges they were facing had also helped, he said. "If there's any problems we're all talking about it together," Mr Allen said. "I'm hoping to make my employees happier, which it is, and then it makes my life and my job much easier." Psychologist Danielle Buckley has been providing advice to employers on how to bridge the generational gap with young employees and keep Gen Zs in their jobs. Part of the solution to the challenges created by different generational attitudes, Ms Buckley said, was embracing the role of technology in communicating with — and training — Gen Z employees. And statistics suggest that bridging the generational gap is an ongoing issue for many employers. The number of people choosing to take up apprenticeships and traineeships has plummeted by a third since the Coalition took office, according to data from the Department of Education. According to Apprenticeship Careers Australia general manager, Luke Radford, completion rates for apprenticeships in New South Wales are as low as 45 per cent in some trades, with the hospitality and automotive industries among those struggling the most to keep their young employees. That was why he retained Ms Buckley to offer advice to employers on how to better connect with their young workers. Mr Radford said there were several reasons apprenticeship dropout rates were so high. He said young people were applying for jobs that were available, or that their parents suggested, rather than identifying trades and employers they were best suited to. However, Mr Radford said he also saw the generational gap causing problems between older employers and younger apprentices and trainees, especially when it came to technology. "Most of the communication that young people do is via apps or via different text messages and the like," he said. "We spend a lot of time communicating via text rather than phone calls, because they don't pick up our phone calls; they communicate via text to us." Beyond the difference in technological uptake, Ms Buckley said the current Generation Z apprentices had a different mindset from that of Millennials. "Unlike the earlier generation, the Millennials, who grew up with the emergence of technology, our Gen Zs have been raised with technology in the palm of their hand," she said. You don't have to have been born between 1946 and 1964 to feel confused about the "OK boomer" phenomenon. Here's how the phrase went all over the internet. "Because of that they've got so much access to information and platforms.  "And this really informs the way that they are, the way they think and the things they believe." According to Ms Buckley, this access to information has led to a generation of young people that wants to build meaningful relationships and work in a way that helps solve problems that the world is facing, from climate change to terrorism. Ms Buckley said Generation Z also had a desire for stability that was different to the generation before it. "Us psychologists say they [Millennials] grew up in the world of the self-esteem movement of parenting where your parents said, 'You can be anything, the world's your oyster'," she said. "But now we're seeing kids today faced with [real-world problems] … I mean look at what's gone down in the world in the last 12 months. "We've had floods, we've had fires, we've got the coronavirus going around the world as well." Another important component to apprenticeship success is making sure that the values of the employer and employee are well-matched, Ms Buckley said. "Everybody is different, and we want businesses to start thinking about, not just 'I want an apprentice', but what sort of person and what sort of culture do you want your business to have," he said. "What we're seeing with young people, particularly Gen Z, is that they want organisations or businesses who match their values — we've seen this more and more. "We saw recently some bands who have said 'no' to playing different concerts because of the carbon footprint they're creating, and I think this really highlights some of the attitudes of young people today." 
