Spotlight to buy collapsed retail chain Harris Scarfe
Collapsed department store chain Harris Scarfe has found a buyer in the Spotlight Group, but the future of its remaining stores and staff remains unclear. The 170-year-old retailer called in the administrators in December, just a month after it was acquired by private equity firm Allegro Funds. The number of Harris Scarfe stores has been reduced from 66 to 44 in the months since, and job cuts reduced employee numbers from more than 1,800 to around 1,300. The coronavirus outbreak is expected to cost the Australian economy billions, with the second-order impact to be felt across supply chains, as many factories remain closed in China. Receivers from Deloitte Restructuring Services have granted the Spotlight group exclusive rights to buy the business, after four parties were shortlisted. The Spotlight Group runs the eponymous chain of fabric and craft stores, as well as camping and outdoor brands Mountain Designs and Anaconda. The receivers said they were "seeking to secure the ongoing employment" of the remaining staff members. "We are hopeful all of the 44 stores will be retained under the sale but ultimately, this will be dependent on how the transaction progresses over the next couple of weeks," receiver Vaughan Strawbridge said. Harris Scarfe is one of a growing list of retail casualties in recent months, including accessories brand Colette and clothing chains Jeanswest and Bardot, which all shut down some of their stores after entering administration. After closing a quarter of its stores and making more than 260 employees redundant, Jeanswest was last week sold to Harbour Guidance, the subsidiary of a Hong Kong company run by the same family that previously owned it. The already-struggling retail sector has had a tough start to the year, with a horror bushfire season impacting domestic travel and spending in fire-affected areas and the coronavirus outbreak disrupting supply chains. The latest ANZ-Roy Morgan survey showed consumer confidence fell 3.2 per cent last week, to be at its lowest in more than five years. "The virus-induced sell-off in the local and global stock markets and the big drop in [Chinese manufacturing] likely contributed to the weakness," ANZ's head of Australian economics David Plank said. Respondents' views of current economic conditions dropped sharply, by more than 16 per cent, but there was more positivity around personal finances. "So far the negative economic outlook has been a better guide to household spending than more positive financial sentiment," Mr Plank said. The receivers for Harris Scarfe said they expected to finalise the sale to Spotlight as early as mid-April. 
