Sydney train network in chaos, major delays on several lines after derailment 
Sydney's train network was thrown into chaos this morning with major delays on several lines after a work car derailed near Circular Quay. Workers in a ute, which had been modified to drive on the rails, were inspecting the track early this morning when the vehicle derailed on the City Circle line between Circular Quay and Wynyard. "It slipped off the rail, it jammed itself and it took our emergency crews to jack it up," Sydney Trains boss Stewart Mills said. The maintenance vehicle was removed about 7:18am and services resumed on the City Circle shortly after. Mr Mills said about 130 services were impacted, but very few were cancelled. Since then, he said, it had been a "complicated recovery". The worst-affected services were for commuters travelling from Western Sydney, the north shore and the airport. Impacted lines included the T2 Inner West and Leppington, T3 Bankstown and T8 Airport and South Line. Even after the morning rush, delays were still being felt, with trains between Circular Quay and Parramatta arriving up to 75 minutes late. Sydney Trains expects trains to be running to timetable for the afternoon commute. Frustrated commuters took to social media to vent about the delays. "Left my house at 6am. Start work in 4 mins at 8 and I'm not even close to getting there any time soon. Just another day on Sydney Trains," one person tweeted. Sydney's train system relies significantly on the City Circle, and incidents there can have massive flow-on effects on lines elsewhere. Mr Mills apologised for the delays, describing a string of recent disruptions as "unprecedented". "We've had some really difficult, exceptional circumstances over the last month," he said. "Whether it's exceptional record heat, to the storms, that is just unprecedented over the network." The price of ride share apps surged amid the chaos, with one commuter travelling 9km from Petersham to Martin Place claiming they were quoted a fare of $85. In a tweet, Sydney Trains encouraged commuters to consider using the city's light rail lines, which run between Dulwich Hill in the inner west, Randwick in the eastern suburbs, and Central. One passenger replied: "Looking forward to that light rail service in Riverwood. How long is it going to take to get here?" Mr Mills said no-one was injured during the derailment incident. There were also delays on the North Shore's line after a trespasser disrupted services at Central earlier this morning. 
