Are we headed for a cashless economy post-coronavirus?
If you got the feeling cash was slowly disappearing from our daily transactions even before coronavirus hit, you were right. Key points:Cash is sometimes required in cases of financial abuse, one of the most common forms of domestic violence, with perpetrators controlling family financesThe homeless are also disadvantaged by a cashless society with people having issues with connectivityRecent research revealed 92 per cent of seniors use the internet, with 57 per cent using it for bankingAccording to the Reserve Bank's 2019 Consumer Payments Survey, Australians are increasingly preferring to use electronic payment methods — with just 27 per cent of all consumer payments made with cash, compared with 37 per cent in 2016, and 69 per cent in 2007. Within a matter of days of COVID-19 cases being diagnosed in Australia, cash suddenly became unacceptable currency in the few businesses that remained open under the newly instituted, socially isolating restrictions. So what has the decline of cash meant for people who rely on physical dollars and cents — everyone from parents handing over pocket money to more vulnerable members of the community such as seniors, the homeless, and people fleeing domestic violence?How Australians pay for goods and services: consumer survey resultsCash needed for survivalIn many cases, cash is a necessary means of survival, especially for victims of domestic violence. Financial abuse is one of the most common forms of domestic violence. Perpetrators controlling the family finances can make it difficult for victims to leave and seek refuge by limiting access to accounts, credit and debit cards, or only providing a weekly cash amount for shopping and expenses. "Most of the women that we work with would approach us and say they actually have very few resources, and that he controls everything. Property and other assets might be in his name or controlled by him," said the CEO of Bendigo's Centre for Non-Violence, Margaret Augerinos. "They may not have access to credit cards or any other banking opportunities, so that is a very common story."However, Ms Augerinos said essential crisis payments and financial support for victims of domestic violence arrive through electronic transactions. Setting up new accounts and financial planning is something domestic service support services help provide. Difficulty accessing the digital worldThe other group of vulnerable people disadvantaged by a cashless society are the homeless. Some partake in street begging to top up government support payments which are received digitally through online accounts. While many are quite "tech savvy" in terms of being able to access different technologies as payment, according to the chief operating officer for homeless and low-income support service Haven Home Safe, Trudi Ray, accessibility to the digital world can be problematic. "What we will be seeing is people having issues with connectivity, with being able to access the internet — and therefore their funds — which is certainly a concern," she said. With many of the local organisations that support people with digital access closed at the moment, there will be an impact. "We've been making sure that we are aware of where the free wi-fi hot spots are around the different municipalities, and we're able to send people to those locations if they do run out of data," Ms Ray said. "We've also talked to Telstra about some other options available to our clients, and we do offer cards that have credit to ensure their technology needs are supported."Second wave of seniors going onlineThere has been a significant uptake of technology by older Australians, which means switching from cash to cards and online banking during the pandemic has made less of an impact. Recent research from RMIT University revealed 92 per cent of seniors use the internet, with 77 per cent using it to find information and 57 per cent using it for banking. Life under a pandemic has meant use of the internet amongst seniors has increased to include social media and applications such as Zoom, Microsoft Teams, and Skype. Where once those platforms and applications were previously perceived as barriers, this is no longer the case. "[Previously seniors said] 'I'm not comfortable, I don't have the skills, I don't know how to do this'. But now that it is a necessity to stay in touch, we see that they have been able to overcome these barriers," said Dr Torgeir Aleti from RMIT University's School of Economics, Finance and Marketing. He believes we are seeing a second wave of seniors online and participating in a whole range of activities. 'Tricky time for the tooth fairy'At the other end of the age scale, earning pocket money from chores around the home and the loss of a tooth or two is a rite of passage for most children. But spending their small fortunes has gotten a little harder today. "With many families spending more time at home, parents might be using pocket money to motivate children to take on jobs around the house," said Professor Julie Green, executive director at online parenting organisation Raising Children. "In the current situation with many shops preferring cashless transactions, parents could think about substituting pocket money using coins and notes for other items such as tokens, or perhaps notes with the value of the pocket money written on them," she said. "These could then be exchanged when children have reached a saving goal or would like to spend their money. "It's a tricky time for the tooth fairy with coins not being widely accepted at the moment."Professor Green suggested parents could consider providing a little gift instead of cash when a child loses a tooth.
