International Women's Day marches around the world call for end to violence against women
Thousands of people around the world have defied government restrictions and fears of the coronavirus to take to the streets to mark International Women's Day. Large demonstrations demanding increased gender equality and an end to female exploitation took place in cities including Madrid, Buenos Aries, Kiev and Manila. Demonstrations in Paris and Bishkek, the capital of Kyrgyzstan, were marred by clashes between police and demonstrators. In Pakistan, thousands of women held rallies across the country despite the threat of violence from fundamentalist groups. Demonstrators clashed with police in Chile and Turkey, as well as Mexico where thousands gathered to protest the number of women being killed in the country every day. Dozens of women covered Mexico City's central Zocalo square with names of victims like Adriana, Dulce, Paola, Nayeli, Ingrid, Maria and many others as part of protests against gender violence. The march was then led by the mothers of murdered girls. "I don't want to be the next one, and I don't want my mother to be the next one," Ana Paula Santos, a 21-year-old university student, said. Government data shows 3,825 women suffered violent deaths in Mexico last year, 7 per cent more than in 2018. Thousands more have gone missing without a trace in recent years. That works out to an average of more than 10 women killed each day, many of those at the hands of their partners, making it one of the most dangerous countries in the world for females. Murders of women in Mexico are often accompanied by sexual violence and brutality, and authorities seem incapable of preventing or properly investigating the crimes, very few of which result in convictions. Marchers carried signs saying, "we are the heart of those that no longer beat", and, "I'm marching today so that I don't die tomorrow". Bands of masked women smashed windows, lit fires and spray-painted messages on buildings. Many in the crowd cheered at the sight of vandals spraying messages like, "we're fed up". One of the biggest demonstrations was in Chile, where thousands flooded the streets of the capital, Santiago. There was dancing and music as well as angry demands for gender equality and an end to violence against women. "They kill us, they rape us, and nobody does anything," some chanted. National police estimated 125,000 people took part in the capital and nearly 35,000 in other cities, but organisers said the crowds were far larger. Many protesters demanded that a proposed new constitution strengthen rights for women and thousands wore green scarves in a show of support for activists in neighbouring Argentina, which is considering a proposal to legalise elective abortion. In the Philippines, where abortions are punishable by up to six years in prison, President Rodrigo Duterte's record on women's rights became one of the targets of the protests in Manila. "In many different ways or forms, women are being exploited and taken advantage of," Arlene Brosas, the representative of a Filipino advocacy group, said during a rally that drew hundreds to the area near the presidential palace. Tens of thousands of women took to the streets in Madrid and other Spanish cities, with a massive banner reading, "with rights, without barriers. Feminists without frontiers", carried at the front of the march in the capital. Spanish health authorities did not put any restrictions on the march but recommended that anyone with symptoms like those of coronavirus stay home. Authorities said 120,000 people participated in Madrid's march, down from 350,000 last year. In Pakistan, women managed to rally in cities across the country, despite petitions filed in court seeking to stop them. The opposition was stirred in part by controversy over a slogan used in last year's march: "My Body, My Choice." Some conservative groups had threatened to stop this year's marches by force. But Pakistani officials pledged to protect the marchers. The rallies are notable in a conservative country where women often do not feel safe in public places because of open harassment. In Istanbul, Turkey, riot police fired tear gas to try to disperse thousands of demonstrators, while security forces in Kyrgyzstan arrested about 60 people — reported to be mostly women — after a group of men tried to break up what authorities called an unauthorised rally in the capital, Bishkek. Tens of thousands of women also marched through Paris, bemoaning the "virus of the patriarchy". "Enough impunity!" chanted some activists, who focused on the high rate of women killed by their husbands in France, where one woman was killed every two or three days by a current or former partner in 2019. The French Government has increased efforts to crack down on domestic violence. "They should provide resources for shelters for women, victims of violence, real resources, human resources, also prevention programs for violent men," union activist Julia Parbotin said. ABC/wires 
