Coronavirus sparked an economic recession that takes more jobs from women than men
The coronavirus pandemic ravaging the planet has laid bare the unequal toll the virus is having on many segments of society, namely minorities and the disadvantaged. There are fewer places this is more profound than the United States. In a country that was unequal prior to the outbreak, the pandemic has exacerbated its racial inequalities, revealed its wealth disparities and exposed gaping holes in its social safety net. Putting the health crisis aside, the economic collapse triggered by the shutdown has been nothing short of staggering. It too has revealed another disparity. More than 33 million Americans have lost their jobs, and for the first time in decades, the face of this financial catastrophe is a predominately female one. If you break down the numbers even further, it's affecting women of colour the most. But this phenomenon isn't limited to the world's largest economy. Global blanket shutdowns and social distancing measures are shattering female-dominated industries like retail, hospitality, education and healthcare. Female unemployment rate hits 15 per cent"It is a she-cession," said Institute for Women's Policy Research president, C Nicole Mason. "What I mean by that is that women have been disproportionately impacted by the job losses over the past couple of months."More than half of the jobs lost in the US during April were held by women. Since February, female unemployment has jumped five-fold to 15 per cent. By comparison, the jobless rate for men was 13 per cent. It's a stark contrast to the global financial crisis, in which men largely shouldered the losses in the financial and construction sectors. Tina Edwards is among the millions at the forefront of this crisis. "I want to say we go back and reopen. But survive? I'm not sure," she said. The mother of six owns a day spa in Washington DC, and like so many other businesses, she was forced to close her doors. So far, her applications for small business and unemployment benefits have been rejected by America's social security system. "I personally don't believe we will reopen until July or August and even then, we won't be 50 per cent of the business we were."Her family used the Federal Government's one-off stimulus cheque to pay bills but with that now spent, she's eating into her emergency savings to make ends meet. "I don't know how, with one income, it's going to work," she said. "This is a really long emergency. With no extra income, we've never been down to just one income. "I know worst case, there are resources we can take advantage of. We haven't got there yet, but I wouldn't doubt I'd ask for assistance if I needed it."Women make up 70 per cent of global healthcare workforceThe April jobs numbers are a stunning and disappointing reversal from a major milestone in December, when women held more payroll jobs than men for the first time in about a decade. The losses are being felt across the globe including Australia. The official jobless figures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics show the number of jobs slumped by 8.1 per cent for women, compared to 6.2 per cent for men. Between mid-March and mid-April, 55 per cent of the jobs lost were held by women. There's no question working from home in a white-collar job is easier in this day and age of internet connectivity. More to the point, for those in roles that require close contact with people, there is no alternative. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has warned the pandemic throws up compounding burdens for women. Firstly, they make up 70 per cent of the global healthcare workforce, meaning they are more likely to be on the frontline treating people who are fighting the disease. They also make up the majority of employees in the parts of the economy that have been hardest hit by the lockdowns. Some women are taking on additional childcare burdensAmid it all, they continue to do most of the unpaid care work within the home, which has in some cases forced women to reduce their hours or leave their job to care for their children. This has been more pronounced in countries like the US, where schools and day care centres have been shuttered across the country for months, adding home-schooling to the list of chores. "They are struggling to put food on the table but they're also struggling to meet their primary care responsibilities," Ms Mason said. She said research by her institute showed 30 million women in the US with children under the age of 13 provided 40 per cent of their household income. "So, this pandemic will have a devastating impact on those families where women are the sole or primary breadwinner," she said. The big, unknown question is how long the shutdowns will last, which will determine how deep and painful the downturn will be. The road to recovery is still hard to visualiseThe unfolding crisis in countries hit hardest, like America, could hamper the road to recovery with many economists warning there won't be a one-for-one replacement in jobs lost. "Are those companies going to be able to rehire those people? That we just don't know," University of Michigan's Justin Wolfers said. "How many bankruptcies are we going to see? How much downsizing are we going to see?"If those temporary layoffs become permanent. That's when this moves from being a short, sharp shock to a long, deep ongoing recession," he said. In past economic crises, countries have wrestled their way out with government-backed nation building infrastructure projects. But if the danger of catching the virus continues to linger or a second wave hits, that might not be enough to drag the world out of this slumber.
