Protests against coronavirus lockdown measures spread in the UK and across Europe
Police in London have arrested 19 people for deliberately breaking social distancing guidelines to protest against the rules, as demonstrations against coronavirus lockdown measures swept across Europe. Key points:Protests against coronavirus measures were held in major cities such as London and BerlinIn Spain, protesters denounced the Government as communists seeking to ruin the countryProtesters in Poland carried signs reading "Work and bread" and "It will be normal again"The Metropolitan Police said a group in central London's Hyde Park had been protesting about the Government's response to the COVID-19 pandemic and had failed to comply with repeated requests to disperse. Police officers were seen taking away protesters, including the brother of Britain's former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, Piers Corbyn. The protests occurred on the first weekend since Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced a slight loosening of England's lockdown. Mr Johnson announced a limited easing of Britain's coronavirus lockdown, adopting a cautious approach to try to ensure there was no second peak of infections that could further hurt the economy and cost lives. The country has been in lockdown since March 23. An unidentified woman wearing a mask took part in the protest holding a sign that said "stop violating our human rights". "I'm protesting because they are violating our rights and I'm against mandatory vaccination. It should be a free choice and I will not be putting poison into my body," she said. A total of 34,466 people have died in the United Kingdom and 236,711 cases were registered. "It was disappointing that a relatively small group in Hyde Park came together to protest the regulations in clear breach of the guidance, putting themselves and others at risk of infection," Laurence Taylor, Deputy Assistant Commissioner at the Metropolitan Police, said in a statement. 'Covidiots' gather to protests restrictions in GermanyIn Germany, thousands of people across the country took to the streets on Saturday to protest against restrictions. Germany's death toll from the virus has been lower than most of its European neighbours and some lockdown measures have already been relaxed. However, protests against the measures Chancellor Angela Merkel insists are needed to slow down the coronavirus outbreak have become more vocal and demonstrators have filled the streets for the second weekend in a row. Derided on social media as "covidiots" who risk causing a second wave of infections that could lead to a tightening of restrictions, protesters staged demonstrations at several locations across the capital Berlin and the surrounding state of Brandenburg. In Munich, organisers asked authorities to give the green light for a rally of up to 10,000 people on the Thersienwiese, a large square in the city centre on which Munich normally stages its world famous Oktoberfest beer festival. But city officials pointed to the need to respect social distancing rules and allowed a demonstration of up to 1,000 people. The hard core of protesters is being led by several new groups. One group is Resistance 2020, led by a lawyer from eastern Leipzig and a doctor from south-western Germany who question official corona statistics and view the main political parties as constructs of an elitist rule. Another group called COMPACT describes itself as the "sharp sword against imperial propaganda". It declares on its website that it is helping the "information offensive" for the growing protest movement. German media have suggested Russia could be behind a misinformation campaign that is spurring on protesters. After winning global respect for keeping the death rate low in Germany, Ms Merkel last week bowed to pressure from some of Germany's powerful regional premiers and agreed to a gradual re-opening of schools, shops and restaurants and even football. However, Ms Merkel, a scientist, has repeatedly warned about a second wave of infections, and a brief uptick in the reproduction rate to above the critical threshold of 1 earlier this week caused fresh concern. The new coronavirus has so far infected more than 173,000 people in Germany and killed nearly 7,900. Most Germans approve Ms Merkel's crisis management, with polls showing support for her conservative CDU/CSU alliance surging to 40 per cent. Dozens arrested in PolandDozens of people, including a senator, were detained during a protest of business owners in the Polish capital against restrictions brought in to tackle the new coronavirus. Warsaw police used tear gas against protesters, intervening in the demonstration after the city's administrators claimed the gathering was illegal because it had not been previously approved. Jacek Bury, a senator for the opposition Civic Platform party, said he was hurt by police when trying to defend another protester. Police said in a statement that public gatherings were still banned under government restrictions. "Unfortunately we are dealing with cases of aggression towards police. Due to the attacks on civil servants, we used methods of direct confrontation such as physical force and [tear] gas," the Warsaw police said in a tweet. However, police denied using force against Mr Bury — something that he claimed was a lie. Poland imposed a strict lockdown in mid-March, and while the restrictions affecting the country's economy are being slowly loosened, many business people say there are still too many. Protesters carrying signs saying, "Work and bread" and "It will be normal again" gathered in Warsaw's Old Town, saying restrictions need to be lifted further in order for them to sustain their livelihoods. Hair salons and restaurants are expected to reopen with new safety measures in place on Monday. Poland, with 38 million people, has more than 18,000 confirmed infections of the new virus and more than 900 deaths. Spaniards call on government to resignProtests sprang up around Spain on Saturday, with demonstrators gathering to bang pots and pans and call for the government to resign. At the largest such demonstration, in Madrid's wealthy Salamanca neighbourhood, several hundred people gathered despite the efforts of police to enforce social-distancing. Carrying Spanish flags and crying "viva Espana!" some denounced the leftist Government as communists seeking to ruin the country. "I am against all the measures which this Government has used to manage the coronavirus," banker Jose Flores said. "They need to test everybody so healthy people can get back to work and we can restart the economy," said a man who gave his name only as Carlos. "The worst virus is going to be the virus of Pedro and Pablo, who are going to ruin 47 million Spaniards," he said, referring to Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez and Deputy Prime Minister Pablo Iglesias. Similar protests took place in Zaragoza and the southern city of Seville, until recently a Socialist party stronghold. "It doesn't matter what the demonstrations are about. The important thing is to maintain social distancing," Mr Sanchez said. Silent protest held in ItalyIn Italy, members of the Italian Hospitality Network held spontaneous protests in several cities amid concerns that restrictions would negatively affect their income. Hospitality workers in Rome protested in front of the Pantheon, wearing their uniforms with a mourning armband while they stood in silence for several minutes. Restaurant managers and owners are worried that the safety measures they will have to adopt will not allow them to work properly and could result in financial losses for the business, as well as the income of their employees.
