Coronavirus pushing bowls clubs into a major rethink
Well before coronavirus sent Australia into lockdown, bowls was facing dark times. Key points:The CEO of Bowls Australia said many clubs have suffered significant financial lossInternational representative Kristina Krstic says now would be a great opportunity to bring young people to the sportThe sport has made a push to increase membership, which has dwindled in recent yearsA decline in membership and revenue across the board for a decade had resulted in dozens of clubs folding in Australia's largest citiesIn 2019, several clubs in Brisbane and Sydney were forced to close their doors, struggling to compete with not only other sports but pubs and restaurants as well. The nationwide shutdown has only added to the headache of many clubs across the country. With many clubs slowly opening up their rinks, the long road back to financial stability for most clubs really begins. "Bowls Australia have recently undertaken a national survey of clubs and from the results, many clubs have clearly suffered significant financial losses which will necessitate a long period of recovery for many," Bowls Australia CEO Neil Dalrymple said. "It will take some time for bowls in Australia to recover but we remain optimistic that the sport and the 1,832 clubs across Australia will play a major role in reconnecting Australians on the other side of this pandemic."Despite the optimism, bowls has struggled for many years. The closure of Waverton North Sydney, as well as Toowong in Brisbane, cast a dark shadow over the future of the sport. The added pressure of coronavirus has left the top brass of the sport under no illusions. "The disappearance of any bowls clubs would be detrimental to those communities not only from a physical health perspective, but just as importantly, from a mental health and social consecutiveness perspective," Mr Dalrymple told ABC News. "Bowls Australia and our State and Territory Associations will be doing everything within our power to avoid the closing of any Bowls Clubs as a result of this pandemic."Bowls in search of the fountain of youthBowls clubs have struggled greatly in recent years. An injection of youth and a great presence in the community have been touted as key objectives to help revive the sport and its clubs. "Bowls Australia certainly isn't advocating for dramatic or drastic changes," Mr Dalrymple said. "But it is a great opportunity for clubs to attract new and younger members to their boards and committees to provide new innovative ideas to help grow clubs. "Now is a great time for clubs to try and increase our market share over the more dominating junior sports including netball, basketball, tennis and soccer."Emphasising the lack of contact in lawn bowls could be a major boost for the sport, according to one of the country's finest bowlers. Kristina Krstic is one of the younger members of the Australian international side and wants her sport to take advantage of the coronavirus shutdown. The 26-year-old from Western Australia has represented her country since she was 21 and sees an opportunity for a swarm of younger players to take up the game. "Placing emphasis on bowls being a "non-contact" sport may attract many families who may be hesitant to go back to contact sports," she said. "Kids have been missing out on the sporting aspects of their lives for almost a couple of months now so they may be interested in trying bowls while they aren't able to return to their usual sports."Preparations already underway across the boardMeasures to prepare sport and bowls clubs for the future were being prepared before the global health crisis. Deals with pay-television provider Foxtel, as well as coverage on SBS and Chanel 7 affiliate 7plus, was a step in the right direction, according to Ms Krstic. "I would definitely like to see this kind of exposure through media channels grow," she said. "Bowls' publicity on these channels is extremely important in regards to putting the sport out there and encouraging young people to take the sport up."But it is the measures at the local level which Mr Dalrymple told ABC were hoped to build clubs in their own communities. A marketing campaign launched in 2019 aimed at people aged between 30-50 is one of the newest measures to encourage new players to try the sport. "The campaign is reaching out to those looking for a team sport that's not inherently physically demanding in comparison to sports such as football and netball," he said. "Our campaign (named Local Legends Wanted) will be aired nationally in the coming months to help relaunch and reinvigorate bowls in Australia."Passion for the support needs to shine throughMs Krstic said the road back for bowls was going to be tough. "It's obviously a very difficult time for bowls clubs at the moment due to the loss of wages in response to COVID-19," she said. But a passionate base of players at clubs across the country will allow the sport to grow once rinks open up, according to Ms Krstic. "There are many existing members itching to get back to playing bowls which will help our bowls clubs grow when restrictions are relaxed," she said. "This moment in time could be a good opportunity for bowls clubs to "restart" and "rejuvenate", potentially by introducing bowls being played all year round"
