Staff, residents in the clear at Rockhampton aged care home where nurse tested positive to coronavirus
More than 200 staff and residents at an aged care home have tested negative for coronavirus after a nurse earlier tested positive, sparking a COVID-19 emergency at the Rockhampton facility. Key points:Staff and residents at the North Rockhampton Nursing Centre have tested negative to coronavirusThe circumstances prior to a nurse testing positive are under investigationThe daughter of one resident says she heard about the nurse testing positive in the mediaQueensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said 235 people at the facility had tested negative, with another 37 results to do. Earlier, 35 residents from the North Rockhampton Nursing Centre had been relocated to the Mater and Hillcrest private hospitals as testing got underway. Plans to move the elderly residents were announced by Deputy Premier and Health Minister Steven Miles after an Enrolled Nurse at the facility tested positive for COVID-19 on Thursday night, more than 10 days after she is believed to have become contagious. The home was placed into lockdown. The incident sparked fears of a repeat of Newmarch House, the Sydney coronavirus cluster that has seen the deaths of 16 aged residents and 69 infections. In a statement, Queensland Health said moving the residents would ensure those who may have been in contact with the infected staff member could be appropriately isolated for the required isolation period. Nurse went to work after being testedThe nurse, who is understood to have been working at a reception desk and not in direct contact with residents while she had symptoms, is now in isolation. The Central Queensland Hospital and Health Service says the circumstances prior to the positive diagnosis are under investigation because she was onsite after being symptomatic and after being sent for testing. How the nurse became infected is still unknown, but tracing is underway to track her movements after a trip to Brisbane before she became sick. Queensland Chief Health Officer Jeannette Young said the nurse had an "essential purpose" to travel to Brisbane but she had been left "speechless" that some people were still not following warnings to say at home while unwell. "She wasn't providing hands-on care to the residents which is a good thing, but she did have contact with people which is why we're being extremely cautious."Dr Young urged all residents in Rockhampton who had "any symptoms" to step forward to be tested and said a second fever clinic would be opened in the central Queensland town today. She said the nurse had been out in the community during that time and it was impossible to trace everyone. Meanwhile, a new fever clinic at the CQ University, north of Rockhampton, will be open from 9am-4pm seven days a week to help cope with more requests for testing. Resident's daughter heard news on TVThe daughter of one 95-year-old resident at the Rockhampton aged care home said she found out about the health scare from a TV news report. Cathy Garvie's 95-year-old mum, Beryl Goddy, lives in the Ivy Baker Ward at the North Rockhampton Nursing Centre, which is the wing at the focus of the scare. "I was watching ABC 24 News and I saw it come up there," she said. "I think they [the centre] had lots more things to think about than worrying about us. They had the patients to think about and everything."Ms Garvie said she had visited her mum on Thursday, the day the nurse was diagnosed. "You had to buzz to be let in and then they listed all the symptoms, 'did you have all these?', and then they took our temperature," she said. "I've always taken all precautions with it. I always wear a hand-made mask when I visit the unit and I clean my hands as I go in and I clean mum's as we go [outside]."Ms Garvie is now in isolation waiting for her own coronavirus test results. "I feel well and my temperature has been 35 for the last few tests I've had over the last couple of weeks," she said. "I have every confidence in the staff there, so I haven't really been that worried. "I've rung them up and wished them all the best and got updates on how everything is going."What are the state guidelines?Jeanette Young issued an aged care direction as a result of the coronavirus public health emergency. Anyone visiting a Queensland aged care facility must have an up-to-date influenza vaccinationUp to two people can visit for a maximum of two hours on a particular dayAnyone providing essential goods, health, medical or pharmaceutical services can enterVisitors are permitted for end-of-life supportAnyone who has returned from overseas in the past 14 days, had contact with a confirmed case, or has any symptoms cannot visitChildren under 16 cannot visit unless it is for end-of-life support
