Could Australia expand its proposed coronavirus travel bubble to the Pacific Islands? Here's what you need to know
In Fiji, pristine bungalows sit empty, sparkling resort pools have no-one swimming in them and thousands of employees who would usually be on hand to greet tourists with wide smiles have been left without work. While COVID-19 has shut down the Pacific Island country's biggest industry, Fiji hopes it won't be for too much longer. The Government wants to see Australian and New Zealand tourists return "as soon as possible" and is pushing hard to become part of the "travel bubble" the two countries are planning. So, when could Australians be back sunning themselves on a beach in Fiji, what are the risks and benefits of reopening borders in the region and what do other Pacific Island countries think of the "travel bubble" idea?Should I start saving for a ticket to Fiji?While discussions between Australia, New Zealand and Fiji are underway, there is still no timeframe on when travel to Fiji, or other pacific island countries, could resume. But Federal Liberal MP and co-convenor of the Parliamentary Friends of the Pacific Group Dave Sharma told the Lowy Institute we could see travel resume to some Pacific Island countries this year. "I'd be hesitant to put a timetable on it, but I expect towards the end of this year — 2020," he said,"I would think we should have some parameters in place that would be allowing us to commence this sort of thing and possibly even sooner."Australia and New Zealand have made it clear that re-establishing travel between themselves is their initial priority, and even that could be some months away. Once we have established travel arrangements across the Tasman, Prime Minister Scott Morrison has also said we will "explore opportunities to expand the concept to members of our broader Pacific family". But all countries are being very cautious in their approach — they want to be confident the risk of spreading COVID-19 from Australia and New Zealand into Pacific Island countries is mitigated, especially because they so far seem to have avoided the worst of coronavirus. The Fijian Government has formally requested to join the bubble and behind the scenes, the country is seen as a frontrunner among Pacific Island countries because of its interest, its tourism industry and its experience with COVID-19. However, Fiji's Attorney General Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum says "these decisions aren't made overnight". "We've obviously put our hand up, we want to look at how we can place ourselves in a more prime position," he said. How would the arrangement work?Australia's High Commissioner to Fiji, John Feakes, said the "hard work" in terms of creating travel arrangements will be hashed out by Australia and New Zealand in the initial stages of the bubble. "Once the work has been done to open up the Trans-Tasman bubble, we will look very quickly to include Fiji in that as well," he said. "But our principal concern is to make sure that the health of New Zealanders, Australians and Fijians is protected."Medical and health considerations will be at the forefront, but issues such as travel insurance, quarantine and testing measures and whether tourists are restricted to certain areas of countries, all need to be agreed upon. Australia and New Zealand have started an expert panel to look at protocols for Trans-Tasman travel and there have been some calls to include Pacific Island stakeholders in the discussions. What about concerns over spreading COVID-19?The ability to trace and respond to potential cases of COVID-19 will also be a consideration. Seemingly in response to this, Fiji is about to start a trial of its own version of the coronavirus tracing app. Mr Sayed-Khaiyum said the country is "feeling good" about how it has responded to the coronavirus, through contact-tracing and lockdowns. It has recorded 18 cases of COVID-19, but no new cases in the past four weeks. But its testing rate is still well below Australia and New Zealand, and there are some early concerns about how effective the app will be in the country. The numbers of COVID-19 cases have been equally steady in most Pacific Island countries, but there is a push to increase antibody testing in the region to ensure cases aren't being missed. Australia, New Zealand and the World Health Organisation are currently delivering almost 100 000 GeneXpert testing cartridges to Pacific Island countries. Pacific countries have experienced devastation from introduced diseases in the past, most recently when measles killed more than 80 people in Samoa. In the face of their vulnerabilities, most acted quickly to protect themselves from COVID-19 and they'll be careful not to jeopardise that now. What do other Pacific Island countries think of the 'travel bubble'?While Fiji has been the most forthcoming about wanting to be included in the "travel bubble," other countries across the region have had different reactions. Vanuatu has confirmed it has had talks with Australia about the idea. While its economy is also heavily reliant on tourism, it has been incredibly cautious about reopening its borders given it has not recorded any cases of COVID-19 so far. The Cook Islands, another tourism dependent economy, has expressed interest in reopening borders. Other Pacific Island countries that haven't recorded any cases, especially those with smaller tourism industries, have also expressed some hesitation. But a Pacific bubble is about more than just providing beaches for Australians and New Zealanders to sun themselves on. It could provide new trade opportunities in the region and reopen travel for Pacific workers who visit Australia and New Zealand under specific labour schemes. Papua New Guinea Prime Minister James Marape said he had held discussions with his Australian counterpart about the travel bubble between Australia and New Zealand. "We're sensitive to those discussions, but Mr Morrison has told me they kept Pacific Islands out of discussions simply because most have almost nil presence of COVID-19," he said. PNG's borders will remain closed until at least the start of June, but its national airline has continued flying to Australia throughout the lockdown period, to collect freight. Mr Marpae said he told Mr Morrison PNG is developing a "protocol on international travel". The Secretary General of the Pacific Islands Forums, Dame Meg Taylor, said several Pacific countries had approached New Zealand and Australia about being included in the bubble. She told an Asia Society Policy Institute event that while everyone wants to see things reopen, it will "take time" and the first priority "is that people stay healthy". "We just don't have strong health systems, health services and health infrastructure," Dame Meg said. "If you're going to open up, you've got to have some kind of security there so that anyone coming into your country, and your citizens as well, feel secure enough that they will be taken care of if there is a case that comes into the country."So why is Fiji so eager to join?Tourism is the country's biggest industry, bringing in about $1.37 billion ($2 billion Fijian) and accounting for 35 per cent of GDP, and Australians and New Zealanders account for about 75 per cent of Fiji's tourists. But no-one has been coming to the country since it closed its borders at the end of March, to protect against the coronavirus. As a result, as many as 100,000 people are thought to have lost work in Fiji and there are growing concerns about the wellbeing of workers who have been laid off. Tony Whitton — managing director of the Rosie Travel Group, which operates two resorts — said he had to stand down 600 workers without pay because the business has no income coming in. "It's been the most heartbreaking aspect of our business — our business has been in operation since 1974, this is the first time that we've had to initiate a furlough," he said. In the midst of the coronavirus lockdown, Fiji was also hit by Cyclone Harold, and the economic impact will likely see a recession, or possibly even a depression. Mr Whitton said the sooner tourists can safely start returning, the better. "The greatest aid that Australia and New Zealand can give us at this time is the tourism dollar," he said.
