Donald Trump's cries about 'Obamagate' are a ploy to distract the media from the coronavirus
In the past week, a rebadged conspiracy theory has been breathlessly promoted by the US President and conservative media pundits: OBAMAGATE! It's not worth discussing at length. But in summary, the story is essentially an updated version of a long-running fringe theory that the Obama administration and the nefarious "deep state" illegally sabotaged Donald Trump from the very start, partly by entrapping his former national security adviser Michael Flynn in the Russia scandal. There is no evidence to tether the vague narrative to reality. Even Trump, when asked for more details, has struggled to specify what criminal activity took place: "It's been going on for a very long time," the President recently mused. "You know what the crime is. The crime is obvious to everybody." Let's be clear; this entire theory is a diversion, a predictable move from the Trump political playbook. While "Obamagate" is being covered and debunked by media outlets, less time is spent reporting on the 90,000-odd Americans killed by the coronavirus, the Administration's slow pandemic response or the human cost of the worst economic crisis America has seen since the Great Depression of the 1930s. Steve Bannon, the President's former strategist, is often credited with best distilling this strategy. "The Democrats don't matter," he reportedly said in 2018. "The real opposition is the media. And the best way to deal with them is to flood the zone with shit." In an ideal world, media outlets would simply filter out the metaphorical faecal matter, reporting what's right and ignoring what's wrong. But in reality, the US industry in the digital age is more partisan than ever and certain sections are often diametrically opposed. Key figures, like the President, can also simply turn to social media to spread their messages. For journalists, following the range of competing narratives for a living can be tiring. For casual observers, making sense of what's accurate, what's exaggerated and what's fake can be completely overwhelming, particularly in an era where increasingly cash-strapped companies value conflict, sensational headlines and clicks above reasoned, fact-based coverage. Some people tune out totally: a few surveys suggest as many as two-thirds of Americans feel worn-out by the torrent of information. Many others retreat to their ideological corners, limiting themselves to programs, presenters and pundits that largely reinforce their preconceived world view. Consensus, even during a once-in-a-century crisis, is much harder to come by. Of course, Trump and his team didn't create this environment — but they do thrive in it. When the daily media cycle is going against them, it's often easily upended with an inflammatory tweet or outrageous press conference. If that doesn't work or a crisis lingers, alternate realities are promoted. During the historic impeachment trial, hours of airtime were dedicated to discussing and debunking theories about Joe Biden's son, Hunter. In the midst of the Mueller investigation, the longest-serving (right-wing) foreign minister in Australian history, Alexander Downer, was talked about as a Clinton-loving deep-state superspy. Even when fact-checkers are able to keep up, their findings can simply serve to elevate the initial fabrication. Arguably even this piece is part of the problem — how many of you had heard of "Obamagate" before now? The whole purpose of "flooding the zone" is to distract and muddy the waters to obscure inconvenient facts. New York University professor Jay Rosen and Vox journalist Sean Illing have written about this phenomenon at length, arguing the media has failed to adapt to Trump's tactics. At this point, it's worth emphasising the coronavirus crisis is totally different from anything else the Trump Administration has faced so far. Unlike impeachment or the Russia probe, the pandemic has upended the everyday lives of Americans. It's much harder to distract voters from something that's landing their loved ones in hospital or making it impossible to put food on the table. Trump's bungled response is pretty clearly on the public record too. He repeatedly, publicly diminished the threat of the virus, comparing it to the flu and stating that it would soon disappear, and failed to act early enough to contain much of the damage.  Several Republican and many Democratic strategists now believe that if this year's election becomes a referendum on Trump's record, he will lose. So far, the White House and the President's campaign have responded by increasing the amount of detritus in "the zone". "Obamagate" is just one note in a crescendo of recent attempts to rile the nation, spread misinformation and reignite old feuds. The President repeatedly attacked governors and smeared whistle-blowers. Trump's son, Don Jr, has even made baseless insinuations about Joe Biden. More than anything, these developments seem a sign of the Commander-in-Chief's distress. A recent national poll has him 11 points behind Biden. The pandemic may be narrowing his path to a second term.  As voting day approaches, the metaphorical "flood" is only likely to grow as team Trump tries to bounce back and keep this presidency afloat. 
