Under financial pressure and slipping into conspiracies, why Instagram influencers promote coronavirus lockdown protests
Former Married at First Sight contestant and Instagram influencer Amanda Micallef has spread COVID-19 misinformation online, but experts say this kind of behaviour and susceptibility to conspiracy theories give us an insight into what can happen to human thinking "under crisis conditions". Recently, she shared a video of another former reality TV contestant speculating that the coronavirus was a ruse to get rid of physical money and added her own caption. "I wholeheartedly believe that the Corona Virus [sic] is the beginning of world control," she wrote. A few weeks ago, fed up with being locked down, Ms Micallef visited an anti-5G Facebook group and advocated for an anti-lockdown protest. The protest never happened, after Victoria Police visited her and warned her against organising the event. But despite the warning from authorities, Ms Micallef remains extremely sceptical of coronavirus lockdowns. "Health precautions my arse, I don't believe in it, I never have and I don't think I ever will," she said. Several social media figures in Australia have gone from posting recipes and workouts to posting wild claims about coronavirus, including chef Pete Evans who was fined $25,000 by Therapeutic Goods Administration last month over misleading claims relating to a light machine called a BioCharger. Ms Micallef said the initial urge to encourage people to ignore lockdown restrictions came from a place of frustration. "Being locked down, having my business and my income heavily impacted and then having more time on my hands to go and research the rabbit holes a little bit further," she said. "What people need to understand is regardless of me being a public figure or not, I too am a human being [and] am heavily impacted financially by this whole lockdown." University of Melbourne social anthropologist James Rose said people were more likely to take up conspiracy theories during stressful conditions, such as those presenting themselves in the pandemic. "What happens under crisis conditions is that people who would otherwise have healthy patterns of thinking, begin to find themselves drawn towards conspiratorial patterns of thinking," he said. "It's because their existing idea systems have begun to break down under pressure and are no longer sufficient to explain what's going on around them. "To explain why they've lost their job, why they're experiencing stress and why daily life has become so unpredictable." Dr Rose said social media — and the power it gives to people to broadcast their views — plays a part in disseminating misinformation. "The only requirement for fringe ideas to become popular is the number of followers that a proponent of that idea has," he said. "In the case of this conspiracy theory linking 5G communications to coronavirus, what we see is at least in relation to the Melbourne protests, the organiser was a contestant on a TV cooking show. "As a consequence of that, they had a large number of followers, so when this person slipped into a conspiratorial way of thinking, all of their followers were exposed to it." Dr Rose is referencing former cooking show contestant Fanos Panayides, who was arrested at last week's anti-lockdown protests. This week Mr Panayides has encouraged Australians to smash their TVs in defiance of the mainstream media. Around the country, some people have reported that friends they would not expect to believe conspiracy theories, have started to believe them. Lee*, who wished to remain anonymous, said she had seen an increase in friends posting conspiracy theory-related content online since the lockdowns began. Breaking down the latest news and research to understand how the world is living through an epidemic, this is the ABC's Coronacast podcast. "Definitely people I would not normally see posting things about conspiracy theories," she said. "That's what's surprised me the most — especially conspiracy theories around medical things." When she posted an article refuting some of the claims being made by her friends she was inundated by friends chastising her. "I had a lot of people commenting, a lot of friends commenting back to me, telling me I needed to wake up and do my research and telling me that they'd gone deep and they'd found information about it," she said. Dr Rose said the rise of views that were once considered fringe could be viewed as maladaptive coping strategies to rising incidences of poor mental health. "There is always some degree of conspiratorial thinking in a national population, normally it only affects a small number of people, who may have other underlying mental health conditions or they may be subject to other protracted or acute stressors because of personal circumstances," he said. "That's because their existing idea systems have begun to break down under pressure, they're no longer sufficient to explain what's going on around them." *name has been changed to protect their identity. 
