COVID-19 is like three different diseases, says New York doctor, from flu-like illness to severe reactions and rare children's syndrome
Almost 10 weeks into the pandemic, COVID-19 is continuing to surprise and baffle health experts. In fact, experts' picture of exactly how COVID-19 might play out in the body is now quite different to what was thought as little as a few weeks ago, with some experts saying it could be better described as three different diseases. We have known for a while that the mild to moderate form of the disease — a flu-like illness with fever, muscle aches and respiratory symptoms, or often no symptoms at all — is almost like "child's play" compared to the major damage to organs like the the lungs, heart, brain, and kidneys seen when COVID-19 becomes severe. Umesh Gidwani, head of cardiac intensive care at New York's Mount Sinai Hospital, says that trying to treat the severe form of the disease is like facing a terrifying fire, burning out of control. "The patients we take care of [in intensive care] are those in whom the fire has already destroyed the house. But there continues to be embers and small fires. I can't enter the house because it's too hot and things are falling on me," he says. "[Severe disease] is almost a completely different animal [compared] to someone who is recovering at home with some chicken soup and paracetamol". And now it seems there is evidence of a third variation in illness that can occur following exposure to the virus — a mysterious new disease given the name paediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome, with an entirely different set of symptoms again. The syndrome seems to only affect children, unlike both mild and severe COVID-19, which mostly affect adults. However the link between the inflammatory syndrome and the virus that causes COVID-19 is not yet 100 per cent confirmed. The bottom line, says Dr Gidwani, is what we have been calling a single disease — COVID-19 — is really looking more like three separate diseases. He and others draw this conclusion based on how the virus affects the immune system. "The key disaster is the extent and severity of the immune response," he says. It is now clear the symptoms experienced by people with severe COVID-19 are largely caused by the body's disordered immune response to the virus rather than the virus itself, Dr Gidwani says. In fact, the disordered immune response in severe COVID-19 is the disease; they are one and the same thing. In contrast, with mild to moderate COVID, the immune response is more measured, with symptoms largely confined to the upper respiratory tract. But with severe COVID-19, the body's response to the infection goes into overdrive. In particular, substances called cytokines, which tell other parts of the immune system there is a problem that needs fixing in the body, and which coordinate the immune response, are released in excessive amounts. This creates what's known as a "cytokine storm", which ends up causing damage to healthy tissue. Doctors have seen similar cytokine storms in people with different kinds of infections or with certain cancers. But the cytokine storm with COVID-19 is wildly different. As a result, therapies that work for the other cytokine storms don't control the problem, Dr Gidwani says. "My brain is thinking 'what is going on? Is there a way to fix this?' I don't know what to do," he says. "It is very challenging, very frustrating, very upsetting."'This is a brand new disease'Understanding what makes the cytokine storm unique in severe COVID-19 is important as it means there may need to be a different approaching to helping patients get better. "This is a brand new disease. We are seeing more and more that the therapies we are used to working with don't necessarily produce the same results with COVID," Dr Gidwani says. One important difference is that the cytokine storm in severe COVID-19 results in widespread blood clotting, which can in turn trigger heart attacks, strokes, deep vein thrombosis (DVT), pulmonary embolisms (clots in veins in the lungs) and limbs so damaged they may need to be amputated. This can lead doctors to misjudge how sick a patient is and withdraw supportive measures such as a ventilator before they should. "It is important to realise this is a distinct [immune] syndrome and that you can therefore avoid certain pitfalls," says Dr Gidwani. "This is not what we expected at the outset. "But we never knew what to expect. I don't know what will happen next either."Over-activation of the immune system could be a major "unifying element" that explains a large part of why the disease can play out in such different ways in severe COVID-19 and in PMIS, says Australian cardiologist and blood vessel researcher Jason Kovacic. An immune attack on blood vessels potentially explains many of the key dangerous features of both conditions, says Dr Kovacic, who is Professor of Medicine and Cardiology both at New York's Icahn School of Medicine and the Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute at the University of NSW.
